Introduction
‘Tomorrow I’m going to Bristol,’ said Mr Trelawney. ‘I’m going
to buy a ship and find sailors. Jim, you and Dr Livesey are going to
come with me to look for the treasure!’
Jim Hawkins works in his father’s inn by the sea. One day an old
sailor comes to stay. He watches the sea and the ships. He is ill.
He is afraid. But what - or who - is he afraid of?
Very soon Jim understands, because the old man has a map. A
lot of people are interested in that map - and some of them are
very dangerous people. Jim Hawkins is going to meet them when
he sails in the Hispaniola to Treasure Island. It will be a journey
with many difficulties . . .
Robert Louis Stevenson was born in      in Edinburgh, Scot-
land and began writing when he was a boy. He finished his first
book when he was sixteen.
He went to many different countries in his life. He was often
dangerously ill and he wanted to find a place with warm weather
where he could live and do his writing. In     , he went by ship
to the Pacific islands, and after      he lived on the island of
Samoa, with his wife, mother and son. The Samoans called him
‘Tusitala’ - ‘the story-teller’.
He wrote many different books and stories. Treasure Island
(    ) is his most famous book but Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde
(    ) is also very well-known. Stevenson died in      on
Samoa.
vChapter   Jim Hawkins’ Story I
My father had an inn near the sea. It was a quiet place. One day,
an old man came to our door. He was tall and strong, and his face
was brown. His old blue coat was dirty and he had a big old box
with him. He looked at the inn, then he looked at the sea.
My father came to the door.
At first the old man did not speak. He looked again at the sea,
and at the front of the inn.
‘I like this place,’ he said. ‘Do many people come here?’
‘No,’ said my father.
‘I’m going to stay here,’ said the old man. ‘I want a bed and
food. I like watching the sea and the ships. You can call me
Captain.’
He threw some money on the table. ‘That’s for my bed and my
food,’ he said.
And so the old captain came to stay with us. He was always
quiet. In the evenings he sat in the inn and in the day he watched
the sea and the ships.
One day he spoke to me. ‘Come here, boy,’ he said, and he
gave me some money. ‘Take this, and look out for a sailor with
one leg.’
He was afraid of that sailor with one leg. I was afraid too. I
looked for the man with one leg, but I never saw him.
Then winter came, and it was very cold. My father was ill, and
my mother and I worked very hard.
Early one January morning, the captain went to the beach. I
helped my mother to make the captain’s breakfast. The door
opened and a man came in. His face was very white and he had
only three ringers on his left hand. I could see that he was a sailor.
‘Can I help you?’ I asked.
 The man looked at the captain s breakfast table.
 Is this table for my friend Bill? The man looked at the captain’s breakfast table.
‘Is this table for my friend Bill?’ he asked.
‘I don’t know your friend Bill,’ I said. ‘It’s the captain’s table.’
‘The captain?’ he said. ‘Well, they sometimes call my friend
Bill the Captain. Is he here in the house?’
‘No. He’s out,’ I said.
The man sat down and waited for the captain. Then the captain
came into the room. He went to his table and sat down.
‘Bill!’ said the man.
The captain turned round quickly. His face went white.
Suddenly, he looked old and ill.
‘Come, Bill, you know me. You know an old friend, Bill,’ said
the man.
‘Black Dog!’ said the captain.
‘Yes,’ said the man. ‘It’s me, Black Dog. I wanted to see my
old friend Billy.’
‘Well, here I am,’ said the captain. ‘What do you want?’
‘I want to talk to you, Bill,’ Black Dog said.
The captain looked at me. ‘Leave the room, boy,’ he said, ‘and
don’t listen at the door.’
They talked for a long time. Then I heard them talking angrily.
‘No, no, no!’ said the captain. There was a fight and then Black
Dog ran out of the house.
The captain’s face was white. ‘I must get out of here!’ he said.
I ran to get him a drink. I came back and found the captain on
the floor. His eyes were closed.
Our doctor, Dr Livesey, came and looked at the old captain.
‘He’s very ill,’ said the doctor.
The captain opened his eyes and looked at the doctor. ‘Where’s
Black Dog?’ he asked.
‘There’s no Black Dog here,’ said the doctor. ‘Now, Billy
Bones, you must. . .’
 ‘Billy Bones?’ said the captain. ‘My name’s not Billy
Bones.’
‘Oh?’ said the doctor. ‘Oh, yes. It’s the name of a famous
pirate.’
We put the old captain in his bed. ‘He must stay in his bed for a
week,’ said the doctor. ‘He’s very ill.’

At twelve o’clock I went to see the captain in his room.
‘What did the doctor say?’ he asked.
‘You must stay in bed for a week,’ I told him.
‘Too late!’ he said. ‘You remember Black Dog. He’s a bad
man, but there are worse men than Black Dog. They want my old
box. You must look out for sailors. You must look out for Flint’s
men.’
Then the captain closed his eyes.
But I didn’t look out for sailors, because my father died that
night. I was too sad to think about the captain.
A week later, the captain came down and sat in his usual chair.
I went outside the inn and looked up and down the road. I saw
another man on the. road. He wore a long black coat and he
walked very slowly.
‘He can’t see,’ I thought.
The man arrived in front of the inn and turned his face to me.
‘Can you tell me, please, where I am?’ I told him. He listened
carefully;
‘You’re young,’ he said. ‘Take my hand, my young friend, and
take me inside.’
He took my hand, He was very strong.
‘Now my young friend,’ he said, ‘take me to the captain.
Quickly! I can break your arm.’
When the captain saw the man, he did not move. The man put
something into the captain’s hand and then left the inn.
 ‘Now my young friend,’ he said, ‘take me to the captain. Quickly!
I can break your arm.’
The captain looked at the black paper in his hand. Then he read
the words on it.
‘Ten o’clock! They’re coming at ten o’clock,’ he said. ‘We’ve
got six hours!’ He tried to stand up, but he was too ill.
I ran for my mother, but it was too late. When we came back
the captain was dead on the floor.

My mother and I went to the village, but the people there did
not want to help us. They were too afraid. Our friend the doctor
was away. Nobody could help us.
 ‘I must get my money from the captain’s box,’ my mother said.
‘It’s our money.’
We opened the box. There were some old coats and shirts and a
bag of money. My mother began to take the money.
‘Quickly!’ I said. ‘It’s nearly ten o’clock.’
It was a cold night, and very quiet. Suddenly, I heard a sound
on the road. Then I heard someone stop outside the inn. We
waited, but then everything was quiet again. Nothing moved.
‘Quickly, mother!’ I said. ‘Take all the captain’s money.’
‘No,’ she said. ‘I don’t want it all.’ Then we heard someone
again, outside the front door.
‘Let’s go without the money,’ my mother said.
I took an envelope from the captain’s box. ‘I’m going to take
this,’ I said.
We left the inn very quietly through the back door. We heard
men running along the road to the inn.
We stopped behind some trees and watched the men. There
were seven or eight of them, all pirates. They broke down the
door of the inn and ran inside.
‘Bill’s dead!’ someone said.
‘Open his box!’ a second man said.
‘The money’s here!’
‘Flint’s map! Where’s Flint’s map?’
‘We can’t find it!’
‘It’s not here!’
‘It’s those people at the inn - it’s that boy! The boy’s got the
map. Find them, boys!’
The men moved quickly. They looked into every room in the
inn.
‘Listen!’ one of them said. ‘Someone’s coming! We must run!’
‘No, find the boy! He’s near here somewhere, I know.’
Then I heard a gun. The pirates heard it too, and began to run
 We stopped behind some trees and watched the men.away. We waited for a minute or two and then we went back to
the inn.
‘What did the pirates want?’ a man from the village asked me.
‘Did they find the captain’s money?’
‘Yes,’ I said. ‘But I think they wanted this.’ I showed him the
envelope. ‘I think there’s a map inside it.’
‘You must take it to Mr Trelawney,’ he told me.

When I arrived at Mr Trelawney’s house, Dr Livesey was there.
‘Hello Jim, what is it?’ he asked.
I told him about the pirates.
‘Let’s see that map,’ the doctor said. ‘But first, Mr Trelawney,
what do you know about Captain Flint?’
‘Flint?’ said Mr Trelawney. ‘He was a famous pirate and a very
bad man. Everybody was afraid of Captain Flint. But he’s dead
now.’
‘Did he have any money?’ asked the doctor.
‘Money!’ said Mr Trelawney. ‘He was the richest pirate in the
West Indies.’
‘Then perhaps this map shows where Captain Flint’s treasure
is,’ said the doctor.
‘What?’ said Mr Trelawney. ‘Then I must buy a ship and we
can all go and look for the treasure.’
The doctor opened the map very carefully. It was a map of an
island. There was some writing on the map. It said: ‘Treasure
here’.
Mr Trelawney and the doctor were excited. ‘Livesey!’ said Mr
Trelawney. ‘Tomorrow I’m going to Bristol. I’m going to buy a
ship and find sailors. Jim, you and Dr Livesey are going to come
with me to look for the treasure!’

 Treasure Island     
The next day Mr Trelawney left for Bristol. I stayed at home and
waited. At last, weeks later, Dr Livesey got a letter from Bristol.
Dear Livesey,
The ship is ready. Its name is Hispaniola. I found a good man to be
our cook on the ship. He’s an old sailor and he has an inn here in
Bristol. He is going to help me find sailors for our ship. He knows a lot
of men here. His name is Long John Silver. He has only one leg.
Please send Jim Hawkins to Bristol tomorrow.
Trelawney.
I was very excited. The next morning I said goodbye to my
mother and started for Bristol. Mr Trelawney met me there.
‘When do we sail?’ I asked him.
‘Sail?’ he said. ‘We sail tomorrow!’
I had something to eat, then Mr Trelawney gave me a letter for
Long John Silver at the Spy Glass Inn.
 There were a lot of sailors in the Spy Glass Inn. I looked round
and saw a tall strong man with one leg. ‘He’s Long John Silver,’ I
thought.
‘Mr Silver, sir?’ I asked.
‘Yes, that’s my name. And who are you?’
I gave him the letter and he took my hand. Suddenly, one of the
other men in the inn jumped up and ran to the door. I knew him. It
was Black Dog!
‘Stop him!’ I said. ‘Stop him! It’s Black Dog!’ ‘Harry,’ said
Silver, ‘run and catch that man.’ A man got up and ran after Black
Dog.
Long John Silver turned to me. “Who was that man?’ he asked.
‘Black what?’
‘Dog, sir,’ I said. ‘He’s a pirate.’
‘A pirate!’ said Silver. ‘Ben, run and help Harry. You can catch
him!’
But Ben and Harry came back without Black Dog. ‘We lost
him,’ they said.
‘Well, what is Mr Trelawney going to think?’ said Silver. ‘You
know, Jim, we did try to catch him. And nobody in the inn knew
that he was the pirate Black Dog. Now, Jim, come with me.
We’re going to see Mr Trelawney.’
Long John Silver walked with me to meet Mr Trelawney and
Dr Livesey. He told them about Black Dog.
Mr Trelawney listened carefully, and then said, ‘Well, we can’t
do anything about Black Dog now. John, tell all the men to come
to the ship this afternoon.’
The doctor turned to me. ‘Come and see the ship, Jim,’ he said.
And meet our captain, Captain Smollett.’
So we went to the Hispaniola. ‘Well, Captain Smollett,’ said
Mr Trelawney, ‘I hope everything is ready.’
‘Well, sir,’ said the captain, ‘it is, but I’m not happy about it. I
don’t like the sailors.’
  Long John Silver turned to me. ‘Who was that man?’ he
asked. ‘Black what?’‘Oh?’ said Mr Trelawney. He was very angry with the captain.
But Dr Livesey said, ‘Tell me, Captain Smollett. Why are you
unhappy?
‘Well,’ said the captain, I don’t know where we are going. But
all the sailors say we are going to look for treasure. I don’t like
it. I don’t know these men.’
‘Well, what do you want?’ asked the doctor.
‘We must have all the guns in our rooms, sir. And Mr
Trelawney’s men must sleep near us, not with the other sailors.’
‘And?’ said Mr Trelawney.
‘You have a map. The sailors know about it. Nobody must see
that map.’
‘Right, sir,’ said Mr Trelawney. ‘We can do that. But I think
they’re very good men.’
‘Trelawney,’ said the doctor later, ‘you have two good men,
Captain Smollett and Long John Silver.’
‘I don’t know about the captain,’ said Mr Trelawney angrily.
Then Captain Smollett found me. ‘And you, boy, go and help
the cook!’
We worked all night and in the morning, the ship left Bristol.
The Hispaniola was a good ship and we had good weather. The
sailors all liked Long John Silver. In the old days, before he lost his
leg, he was a good fighter,’ some of them said. He was always very
good to me.
Mr Trelawney liked to give the sailors things to make them
happy. There was always a big barrel of fruit for them.
One night, after I finished my work on the ship, I went to get
some fruit from the barrel. Everything was very quiet. I climbed
inside the barrel to get the fruit. Suddenly a heavy man sat down
next to the barrel. He began to speak. It was Long John Silver. I
stayed very quiet.
  ‘Yes,’ he said. ‘Flint was our captain. I sailed with him many
times. We had one big fight. I lost my leg and Old Pew lost his
eyes. I saw a lot of fighting and a lot of treasure, too.’
‘Ah,’ said a younger man. ‘Flint was a bad man! And where are
all Flint’s men now?’
‘Most of them are here,’ said Silver quietly, ‘on this ship. Old
Pew’s dead. And you, young man, do you want to help us? Do
you want to be a pirate?’
‘Yes I do.’
‘Good,’ said Silver. ‘You’re going to be a good pirate.’
Then a second man spoke to Long John Silver. It was Israel
Hands.
‘I don’t like our captain, John,’ he said. ‘Let’s kill Smollett and
the others.’
‘No. We must wait. We must have Captain Smollett to sail the
ship,’ said Silver. ‘And Mr Trelawney and the doctor have the
map. Let them find the treasure first. Then we can kill them. Now
get me some fruit from this barrel.’
I was very afraid. But then someone said, ‘Land!’
Everybody ran to see the island. I waited for a minute, then I
climbed out of the barrel and ran, too. The ship was now quite
near an island.
‘Does anybody know this island?’ Captain Smollett asked.
‘I do,’ said Silver. ‘There were a lot of pirates here in the old
days. That hill in the centre of the island is called the Spy Glass.’
Then Captain Smollett showed Silver a map of the island.
Silver looked at the map very carefully, but it was not Billy
Bones’s map. It did not show the treasure.
I went to Dr Livesey. ‘Can I speak to you please, doctor?’ I
said.
‘What is it, Jim?’ he asked.
  Then I told the doctor, Mr Trelawney and Captain Smollett
about Long John Silver. ‘Most of the sailors are pirates,’ I said.
‘They want to kill us and take the treasure.’
‘Thank you, Jim,’ said Mr Trelawney. ‘And Captain Smollett,
you were right. I was wrong. I’m sorry.’
‘Silver is a very clever man,’ said the doctor. We all liked him.’
‘What are we going to do, captain?’ asked Mr Trelawney.

The next morning we arrived at the island. I remembered Billy
Bones’s map. ‘I know there’s a house on the island,’ I thought.
‘But I can’t see it from here.’
The sailors wanted to leave the ship, but Captain Smollett said,
‘Tell the men they can go to the island this afternoon.’
‘What are we going to do?’ asked Mr Trelawney. ‘We must
think quickly.’
Three of the men on the ship, Hunter, Joyce and Redruth, were
Mr Trelawney’s men. He told them about Long John Silver and
the pirates and he gave them some guns. Then he spoke to the
other men, the pirates.
‘Men,’ he said, ‘it’s a hot day and we’re all tired. Take a boat
and go to the island. You can come back this evening.’
The pirates were happier. Six of them stayed on the Hispaniola
and thirteen got into the small boats to go to the island. I quietly
got into one of the boats, too.
We arrived on the beach and I ran away from the pirates. Long
John Silver saw me. ‘Jim! Jim!’ he said. ‘Come here!’ But I did
not listen to him. I ran into the trees.
I walked about for a time, then I heard the pirates talking
angrily. There was some fighting, and one man died.
‘He didn’t want to help them, so they killed him,’ I thought,
‘They’re bad men.’

  ‘I know there’s a house on the island,’ I thought. ‘But I can’t
see it from here.’I ran and ran. ‘How can I get back to the ship?’ I thought. ‘The
pirates are going to kill me, too.’
I climbed the hill. Suddenly I saw a man. Who’s this?’ I
thought. ‘He isn’t one of our men. Nobody lives on this island.’
I began to run back to the beach, but I was tired and the man
ran very quickly. I stopped and took out my gun.
The man carefully came out of the trees. ‘Who are you?’ I
asked.
‘I’m Ben Gunn,’ he said. ‘I live here. The pirates left me on this
island three years ago. What’s your name?’
‘Jim,’ I told him.
‘Well, Jim,’ he said, ‘I’m a very rich man. But tell me, who
came in that ship? Is it Flint’s ship?’
‘No, it isn’t. Flint is dead,’ I said. ‘But some of his men are on
the ship.’
‘Not. . . not a man with one leg?’
‘Silver?’ I asked.
‘Yes, Silver,’ he said. ‘Are you a friend of his?’
‘No, I’m not,’ I answered. And I told him everything.
‘Is Mr Trelawney a good man?’ Ben asked. ‘Perhaps I can help
him.’
‘Yes, he’s very good. And I think he can help you, too.’
‘Good,’ said Ben Gunn.
‘But can you help me now?’ I asked. ‘I must get back to the
ship.’
‘I’ve got a little boat,’ he said. ‘You can use it tonight.’
Suddenly we heard the sound of guns. ‘Listen! they’re
fighting!’ I said.
We ran to the beach. We heard more guns, then everything
was quiet and a flag went up above the trees.
  ‘I’m Ben Gunn,’ he said. ‘I live here.’Chapter  
Dr Livesey’s Story
At half-past one in the afternoon two small boats went from the
ship to the island. We looked for Jim Hawkins on the Hispaniola,
but he was not there.
We waited on the ship. There were six pirates with us. Then
Hunter and I took a boat and went to the island. I wanted to see
the house on the island.
The house was strong and it was in a good place. ‘We can stay
here,’ I thought. ‘There’s water, and we can bring food and guns
from the ship.’
Then I heard the pirates fighting in the trees. ‘They’re killing
someone,’ I thought. ‘Perhaps Jim Hawkins is dead.’
Hunter and I went back to the Hispaniola. I told the captain
about the house, and we started to put food into the small boat.
The pirates on the ship did not hear us.
Joyce and I carried the food from the beach to the house. Joyce
stayed in the house with his gun and I went back to the ship. We
put more food and our guns into the small boat and dropped all
the other guns into the sea. Then Mr Trelawney’s men Redruth
and Hunter, Mr Trelawney, the captain and I left the ship. There
were five of us in a small boat and we moved very slowly.
Then we saw the pirates on the Hispaniola. They had the big
gun on the ship.
‘They’re going to shoot at us,’ somebody said.
We tried to go faster. Mr Trelawney shot at the men on the ship.
He hit one of them.
Then the pirates on the island ran out of the trees. They began
to run along the beach.
  ‘There were Jive of us in a small boat and we moved very slowly.’Captain Smollett said sadly, ‘Now there are only five of us
and we have food for ten days. What are we going to do?’‘Quickly!’ said the captain. ‘They’re going to catch us. Leave
the boat.’
We heard the big gun on the Hispaniola behind us; we jumped
on to the beach and ran. Most of our food and our guns went
down into the sea with the small boat.
We heard the pirates running along the beach behind us, but we
ran quickly through the trees to the house. We arrived at the house
and turned to shoot at the pirates.
We hit one of the pirates, and the other men ran away. Then one
of the pirates turned and shot Redruth through the head.
Captain Smollett said sadly: ‘Now there are only five of us and
we have food for ten days. What are we going to do?’
Suddenly we heard somebody outside. ‘Dr Livesey,’ said Jim
Hawkins, ‘it’s me, Jim. I’m here.’
So then there were six of us.
  Chapter   Jim’s Story II
‘Your friends are in the house now,’ said Ben Gunn.
‘I must go to them,’ I said. ‘Are you coming with me?
‘No,’ said Ben. ‘But you know where to find me. Come
tomorrow afternoon.’
I looked at the Hispaniola, out on the sea, and saw the pirates’
flag. ‘They have the ship now,’ I thought.
The pirates on the beach made a big fire. They started to drink
and to talk loudly. I waited for a time, then went to the house. I
told Dr Livesey about my meeting with Ben Gunn up on the
hill.
‘Tell me about this man,’ said the doctor. ‘Is he going to help
us?’
‘Yes, I think he is,’ I said.
‘There are fifteen pirates now,’ said the doctor. ‘And there are
six of us. Seven, with Ben Gunn.’
I was very tired and I slept well that night. The next morning
one of our men said: ‘Look! Someone’s coming! A man with a
white flag.’
‘Don’t shoot!’ said the man. ‘It’s me. John Silver.’ ‘What do
you want?’ asked Captain Smollett. ‘Captain Silver wants to talk
to you,’ said Long John. ‘Captain Silver now? Come on, then,’
said Captain Smollett. Long John came slowly up the hill to the
house. We all watched him.
‘Yes?’ asked the captain.
One of our men is dead,’ said Silver. ‘You killed him in the
night.’
The captain said nothing.
   Captain Silver wants to talk to you,  said Long John.
‘We didn’t kill that man,’ I thought. ‘Ben Gunn killed him.
Now there are only fourteen pirates.’
‘We want that treasure,’ Silver said. ‘And you’ve got a map,
right?’
‘Perhaps,’ said the captain.
‘I know you’ve got it,’ said Silver. ‘Give us the map. Then you
can leave the island with us, or, if you like, you can stay here.’
‘Is that all?’ asked Captain Smollett. ‘Now, listen to me, Silver.
You can’t find the treasure and you can’t sail the ship. We aren’t
going to help you find the treasure, so you can go now. I have
nothing more to say to you.’
‘Then we’re going to fight you,’ said Silver angrily, and he
went away, walking slowly down the hill.
  It was a hot day. We waited for a long time and then the pirates
started shooting again. Suddenly some of the pirates ran out of the
trees up to the house.
‘Get them!’ said the captain. We all fought hard. We killed
three of the pirates and the others ran away. But when we got
back inside the house we found that Joyce was dead. Hunter and
the captain were hurt, too.
‘Five pirates are dead,’ said the doctor.
‘Good,’ said the captain. ‘Now they have nine men and we have
five.’

The pirates went back to the beach. Everything was quiet. Later
that day Hunter died.
The doctor left the house. ‘He’s going to meet Ben Gunn,’ I
thought. It was very hot inside the house and I did not like
waiting. So I took some food and a gun and went to look for Ben
Gunn’s boat.
After about an hour I found it. It was very small and light. ‘I
can take this boat and go out to the Hispaniola at night,’ I
thought.
I sat down and waited. Night came, and it was very dark. The
pirates had a big fire on the beach, and there was a small light on
the Hispaniola. Very quietly, I put Ben Gunn’s boat into the sea.
The boat moved slowly and quietly across the water. Soon I was
near the ship. Nobody saw me.
‘I can cut the ship’s rope with my knife,’ I thought. ‘And then
the wind can push the ship away from the beach.’
I listened. There were two men on the ship. The other pirates
were all on the beach. The men on the ship were talking loudly
and angrily. ‘They’re going to have a fight,’ I thought. One of the
men was Israel Hands.
I waited, then I cut the rope. Slowly the ship turned round and
  ‘I can cut the ship’s rope with my knife,’ I thought.began to move away from the beach. The two men on the ship
started to fight. The pirates on the beach sat round their fire and
sang. They did not see the ship moving away. I sat down in Ben
Gunn’s boat and fell asleep.
In the morning I sat up and looked around. The little boat was
not far from the island and I saw that I was quite near the
Hispaniola. I looked for Israel Hands and the other pirate, but I
did not see them. I moved slowly nearer and nearer to the
Hispaniola. Then I climbed on to the ship.
The two pirates were there, on the ship. They did not move.
One of them was dead. Israel Hand’s leg was badly hurt, but he
was not dead.
I looked round the ship. All the cupboards were open, and
everything was dirty. There were a lot of bottles on the floor.
I found some drink and gave it to Hands. Then I took down the
pirates’ flag. ‘The ship is ours, now,’ I thought.
Israel Hands spoke. ‘You can’t sail the ship, Jim Hawkins,’ he
said. ‘Give me some food. I can help you.’
‘I don’t want to go back to the beach,’ I said. ‘Help me to sail it
to the North Inlet.’
‘Right,’ he said.
So we sailed to the north of the island. The ship moved quietly
through the water; I was happy. The old pirate watched me
carefully.
Then he smiled. ‘Jim, go and get me . . . er . . . get me
something to drink,’ he said. ‘I’m thirsty.’
I did not like his smile. I went away, but I came back very
quietly and watched him. He moved slowly and took a knife from
behind some rope. Then he put the knife under his jacket and he
went back to his old place.
Ah,’ I thought. ‘He can move and he’s got a knife. He wants to
kill me. I must be careful.’
I went back to him and gave him the bottle. We sailed on and
  So we sailed to the north of the island. The ship moved
quietly through the waters; I was happy.
came to the North Inlet. Hands told me what to do and I
brought the ship near the beach. I watched the sails and the sea,
but I did not watch Hands. Suddenly I turned and saw him behind
me with his knife in his hand. I jumped away and took out my
gun. I tried to shoot at Hands but nothing happened. The gun was
wet with sea water.
I moved away quickly, but Hands followed me. I climbed up
among the sails and tried to shoot again. Hands looked up, then
he threw his knife at me. It went into my arm. Then I shot him
and he dropped into the sea.
The pirate’s knife was in my arm. I pulled it out and climbed
down on to the ship.
  It was now evening. ‘I must go back to the house now,’ I
thought. ‘They’re going to be angry with me, but I’ve got the
ship.’
So I left the ship and went happily back through the trees. I saw
the house, and a big fire next to it. I moved on quietly through the
trees and went into the house. It was dark and very quiet.
‘Everyone is sleeping,’ I thought.
Then somebody spoke. ‘Who’s there?’ he said. It was Long
John Silver.
Somebody brought a light. There were six pirates in the room.
The other pirates were all dead.
‘So here’s Jim,’ said Long John Silver. ‘Here to visit us. That’s
very nice ...’
I said nothing.
‘So now you want to be a pirate, Jim,’ Silver said. ‘The captain
and the doctor are angry with you, I know.’
‘What’s happening?’ I asked.
‘Well, Jim,’ said Silver. ‘The ship’s far away. Your friends left
the house yesterday, and we’re here now. And you, Jim, are you
going to stay with us?’
‘Let’s kill him,’ said one of the other pirates.
‘No,’ said Silver. ‘I’m the captain. And I like this boy.’
The other men were angry with Silver. They went away to talk
about it together.
‘I want to help you, Jim,’ said Silver quietly to me. ‘But you
must help me, too.’
At last the other pirates came back. They gave Silver some
paper. It was black.
‘You aren’t our captain now, John Silver,’ one of the pirates
said. ‘We don’t want you. And we don’t want that boy.’
  ‘So here’s Jim. Here to visit us. That’s very nice . . .’‘Well,’ said Silver. ‘I have something you want. Look! And he
showed them Mr Trelawney’s treasure map. ‘The doctor gave me
this!’ he said.
The pirates were very excited and they all looked at the map.
‘Good old Silver!’ they said. ‘Good old Captain Silver!’
The next morning the doctor came to the house.
‘Good morning, doctor,’ said Long John. ‘Look who’s here!’
‘Jim!’ said the doctor. ‘I want to talk to you. But first I must
look at these men.’
‘Now I want to talk to Jim,’ said the doctor after a few minutes.
‘No, you can’t,’ said one pirate.
But Silver said, ‘Yes, he can. You can speak to the boy, doctor.’
The doctor turned to me. ‘Why are you with the pirates, Jim?’
he asked sadly.
‘It was a mistake,’ I said. ‘They caught me here last night. But
doctor, I’ve got the ship. It’s in the North Inlet.’
‘The ship!’ said the doctor.
I told him my story.
‘Good boy!’ he said. Then he turned to Silver. ‘Silver! Look
after this boy. Perhaps I can help you later. Goodbye, Jim.’
And the doctor left us.
‘And now, Jim,’
treasure.’
said Silver, ‘we’re going to look for the
The pirates thought about the treasure and they were happy.
They ate their breakfast quickly and we all started to walk along
the beach.
‘We must go this way, and look for a tall tree,’ said Silver.
  There were a lot of tall trees on the island and the pirates ran to
look at all of them.
Then one of the pirates said, ‘Here!’ Near a tree was a dead
man.
‘He was a sailor,’ said one of the pirates. ‘Look at his jacket!
But what’s he doing here? When did he die?’
‘Flint killed him years ago,’ said Silver. ‘He’s showing us the
way to the treasure. Follow his arm. Come on! This way.’
The pirates followed quietly. They were afraid. We climbed a
hill, then we sat down.
Suddenly we heard singing. ‘It’s Flint!’ said one man, his face
very white. ‘No,’ said Silver. ‘Not Flint. Flint’s dead. Remember
the treasure, my boys, and don’t be afraid!’ But all the pirates had
white faces.
Silver listened carefully to the singing. ‘That’s not Flint!’ he
said. ‘It’s . . . it’s Ben Gunn! We’re not afraid of Ben Gunn!’
The singing stopped and we moved on. After twenty minutes
we saw a very big tree on top of a hill. The pirates started to run.
But they did not find any treasure. Under the tree they found
an old box. There was nothing in it. Flint’s treasure was not there.
For a long time the six pirates sat and said nothing. Then Silver
turned to me. ‘Be very careful, Jim,’ he said quietly. ‘These men
are dangerous.’ He gave me a gun.
The pirates looked at us and we looked back at them. Suddenly,
from the trees, guns started to shoot. Two of the pirates dropped
to the ground and the other three ran away.
The doctor and Ben Gunn ran out of the trees and started to run
after the pirates. ‘They can’t get away,’ said Silver. ‘And you,
Ben Gunn, what are you doing here?’
The doctor and Ben told us Ben’s story. ‘Ben found the treasure
a long time ago,’ said the doctor. ‘He moved it to his
  I had a good dinner that night with all my friends.home on the island. So I gave the pirates Flint’s map and we
left the house and went to stay with Ben.’
We took one of the pirate’s boats, and broke the other. ‘The
pirates haven’t got a boat now,’ said the doctor. ‘They can’t
follow us.’
Then we went round the island to find the Hispaniola. At last
we found our ship and met Mr Trelawney and Captain Smollett.
‘What are you doing here, John Silver?’ asked the captain.
‘I’m here to help you,’ said Silver.
‘Ah,’ said the captain.
I had a good dinner that night with all my friends. We were all
happy. Silver ate and drank and smiled and laughed too.
iola. Then I climbed on to the ship.
The two pirates were there, on the ship. They did not move.
One of them was dead. Israel Hand’s leg was badly hurt, but he
was not dead.
I looked round the ship. All the cupboards were open, and
everything was dirty. There were a lot of bottles on the floor.
I found some drink and gave it to Hands. Then I took down the
pirates’ flag. ‘The ship is ours, now,’ I thought.
Israel Hands spoke. ‘You can’t sail the ship, Jim Hawkins,’ he
said. ‘Give me some food. I can help you.’
‘I don’t want to go back to the beach,’ I said. ‘Help me to sail it
to the North Inlet.’
‘Right,’ he said.
So we sailed to the north of the island. The ship moved quietly
through the water; I was happy. The old pirate watched me
carefully.
Then he smiled. ‘Jim, go and get me . . . er . . . get me
something to drink,’ he said. ‘I’m thirsty.’
I did not like his smile. I went away, but I came back very
quietly and watched him. He moved slowly and took a knife from
behind some rope. Then he put the knife under his jacket and he
went back to his old place.
Ah,’ I thought. ‘He can move and he’s got a knife. He wants to
kill me. I must be careful.’
I went back to him and gave him the bottle. We sailed on and
  So we sailed to the north of the island. The ship moved
quietly through the waters; I was happy.
came to the North Inlet. Hands told me what to do and I
brought the ship near the beach. I watched the sails and the sea,
but I did not watch Hands. Suddenly I turned and saw him behind
me with his knife in his hand. I jumped away and took out my
gun. I tried to shoot at Hands but nothing happened. The gun was
wet with sea water.
I moved away quickly, but Hands followed me. I climbed up
among the sails and tried to shoot again. Hands looked up, then
he threw his knife at me. It went into my arm. Then I shot him
and he dropped into the sea.
The pirate’s knife was in my arm. I pulled it out and climbed
down on to the ship.
  It was now evening. ‘I must go back to the house now,’ I
thought. ‘They’re going to be angry with me, but I’ve got the
ship.’
So I left the ship and went happily back through the trees. I saw
the house, and a big fire next to it. I moved on quietly through the
trees and went into the house. It was dark and very quiet.
‘Everyone is sleeping,’ I thought.
Then somebody spoke. ‘Who’s there?’ he said. It was Long
John Silver.
Somebody brought a light. There were six pirates in the room.
The other pirates were all dead.
‘So here’s Jim,’ said Long John Silver. ‘Here to visit us. That’s
very nice ...’
I said nothing.
‘So now you want to be a pirate, Jim,’ Silver said. ‘The captain
and the doctor are angry with you, I know.’
‘What’s happening?’ I asked.
‘Well, Jim,’ said Silver. ‘The ship’s far away. Your friends left
the house yesterday, and we’re here now. And you, Jim, are you
going to stay with us?’
‘Let’s kill him,’ said one of the other pirates.
‘No,’ said Silver. ‘I’m the captain. And I like this boy.’
The other men were angry with Silver. They went away to talk
about it together.
‘I want to help you, Jim,’ said Silver quietly to me. ‘But you
must help me, too.’
At last the other pirates came back. They gave Silver some
paper. It was black.
‘You aren’t our captain now, John Silver,’ one of the pirates
said. ‘We don’t want you. And we don’t want that boy.’
  ‘So here’s Jim. Here to visit us. That’s very nice . . .’‘Well,’ said Silver. ‘I have something you want. Look! And he
showed them Mr Trelawney’s treasure map. ‘The doctor gave me
this!’ he said.
The pirates were very excited and they all looked at the map.
‘Good old Silver!’ they said. ‘Good old Captain Silver!’
The next morning the doctor came to the house.
‘Good morning, doctor,’ said Long John. ‘Look who’s here!’
‘Jim!’ said the doctor. ‘I want to talk to you. But first I must
look at these men.’
‘Now I want to talk to Jim,’ said the doctor after a few minutes.
‘No, you can’t,’ said one pirate.
But Silver said, ‘Yes, he can. You can speak to the boy, doctor.’
The doctor turned to me. ‘Why are you with the pirates, Jim?’
he asked sadly.
‘It was a mistake,’ I said. ‘They caught me here last night. But
doctor, I’ve got the ship. It’s in the North Inlet.’
‘The ship!’ said the doctor.
I told him my story.
‘Good boy!’ he said. Then he turned to Silver. ‘Silver! Look
after this boy. Perhaps I can help you later. Goodbye, Jim.’
And the doctor left us.
‘And now, Jim,’
treasure.’
said Silver, ‘we’re going to look for the
The pirates thought about the treasure and they were happy.
They ate their breakfast quickly and we all started to walk along
the beach.
‘We must go this way, and look for a tall tree,’ said Silver.
  There were a lot of tall trees on the island and the pirates ran to
look at all of them.
Then one of the pirates said, ‘Here!’ Near a tree was a dead
man.
‘He was a sailor,’ said one of the pirates. ‘Look at his jacket!
But what’s he doing here? When did he die?’
‘Flint killed him years ago,’ said Silver. ‘He’s showing us the
way to the treasure. Follow his arm. Come on! This way.’
The pirates followed quietly. They were afraid. We climbed a
hill, then we sat down.
Suddenly we heard singing. ‘It’s Flint!’ said one man, his face
very white. ‘No,’ said Silver. ‘Not Flint. Flint’s dead. Remember
the treasure, my boys, and don’t be afraid!’ But all the pirates had
white faces.
Silver listened carefully to the singing. ‘That’s not Flint!’ he
said. ‘It’s . . . it’s Ben Gunn! We’re not afraid of Ben Gunn!’
The singing stopped and we moved on. After twenty minutes
we saw a very big tree on top of a hill. The pirates started to run.
But they did not find any treasure. Under the tree they found
an old box. There was nothing in it. Flint’s treasure was not there.
For a long time the six pirates sat and said nothing. Then Silver
turned to me. ‘Be ve
The next morning we started to carry the treasure to the ship.
We did not see the three pirates on the island. Three days later, we
finished our work. We heard the pirates singing loudly, but we did
not see them.
We left some boxes of food for the pirates, and started across
the sea to the nearest town. We were happy when we arrived
there. And there Silver left us. We were in the town and he got
away. He took some of the treasure with him, too.
And so, after some weeks at sea, we arrived home with our
treasure. I never wanted to go back to that island again.
They went back to the place outside the church, and Sir Ector put the sword in the stone
again.
‘Now pull it out,’ he said to Arthur.
Arthur pulled it out. It came out as easily as a knife out of butter. Sir Ector saw this and
took Arthur’s hand.
‘You are my king,’ he said.
Only the next king can pull the sword out of the stone. Many people try, but they cannot
move the sword. Then young Arthur tries, and it comes out easily. Now he will be king. But
will he be a good king? Will his people love him? And will his life be happy?
The story of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table is very, very old. People
know that there was a king in Britain between the years     and    . He fought the
Saxons, from countries in the north of Europe, and perhaps this king was Arthur. He lived,
perhaps, in Wales or in the west of England — in Somerset or Cornwall.
People wrote stories about this king hundreds of years later, but they made the stories
more interesting and more exciting. At that time people were interested in magic, knights
and their ladies. So people fight with swords and use magic in these stories.
Who wrote these first stories? Nobody really knows, but different people in France and
Britain wrote about King Arthur and his knights. Not every book about them has the same
people and stories in it. One book (    ), by Sir Thomas Malory, is very famous. He used
French stories about King Arthur and wrote them in English.Chapter  
Arthur and Merlin
This very old story begins with Uther, a great king. He was a good man and he was king in
the south of Britain. Other places were very dangerous at that time, but people did not fight
in Uther’s country. Uther loved a beautiful woman, Igraine, and he wanted to marry her.
But she did not love him and he was very sad about that.
Merlin was a very clever man and he knew a lot of magic. He could change into an
animal or bird. Sometimes, when he used magic, nobody could see him. He also helped
people with his magic, and one day he came to King Uther.
‘You can marry Igraine,’ he said. ‘I will help you. But when you have a child, you will
have to give the boy to me.’
‘I will give him to you,’ said the King. He married Igraine and later they had a baby
son. They called him Arthur. When Arthur was three days old, a very old man arrived at
the door of the King’s house. It was Merlin. King Uther took the child in his arms and gave
him to Merlin. Merlin took the child away. He gave the boy, Arthur, to a good knight. His
name was Sir* Ector. So Arthur lived with Sir Ector and his son, Kay, and the two boys
were brothers.

A short time after this happened King Uther was very ill. He did not get better. He called for
Merlin because he wanted to talk about the future of his country. Merlin came and listened
to the King.
‘I know that I am going to die,’ King Uther said. ‘Who will be king after me?’
‘Call your knights and great men,’ Merlin told the King. ‘Tell them, "My son, Arthur, will
be the next king!”‘
King Uther told his people this before he died. But a lot of people wanted to be king, so
the knights and great men began to fight. There was no new king for a long time.

When Arthur was a young man. Merlin went to London. He visited the Archbishop, the
most important man in the Church.
‘Call the knights to London. Then we will find the new king,’ Merlin told the Archbishop.
The knights came to London. They met at a large church, and the Archbishop spoke to
them. When they came outside, they saw something strange in front of the church. It was
a very large stone with a great sword in it. The sun shone on the sword and it looked very
strong. The knights were excited, and started to talk about it.
* Sir is name for a knight.‘ Where did it come from?’
‘How did it get here?’
‘Who brought the stone here? We didn’t see anybody. And who put the sword in it?’
On the stone were these words:
ONLY THE KING
CAN TAKE THE SWORD FROM THE STONE
Every knight tried to pull the sword out of the stone. Nobody could do it — the sword did
not come out. The knights pulled and pulled. But they could not move the sword.
‘Our king is not here,’ said the Archbishop. ‘But I know that we will find him.’
Ten knights stayed and watched the stone. The Archbishop invited all the great men in
the country to London for a big fight. There were many big fights at that time. People
fought on horses with swords in their hands. The strongest and best knight always won.
‘Perhaps the new king will come to the fight,’ thought the Archbishop.
Sir Ector went to the fight with his two sons, Sir Kay and young Arthur. Arthur was now
sixteen years old. The young men wanted to fight with the other knights, but Sir Kay did
not have a sword. Arthur was a kind young man. He wanted to help.
‘There is a sword in a stone outside a church. I saw it on the way here. I will get it and
fight with it. Then you can have my sword,’ he said to his brother.
Arthur left Sir Kay and quickly went to the church. There were no knights outside by the
stone because they were at the fight. Arthur climbed down from his horse and went to the
stone. He did not read the words on the stone. He took the sword in his hand and pulled. It
came out of the stone easily.
He ran back to his horse with the sword. Some minutes later he met Sir Kay and Sir
Ector again, and he showed them the sword.
‘Where did that sword come from?’ Sir Ector asked. He knew about the words on the
stone.
They went back to the place outside the church, and Sir Ector put the sword in the
stone again.
‘Now pull it out,’ he said to Arthur.
Arthur pulled it out. It came out as easily as a knife out of butter. Sir Ector saw this and
took Arthur’s hand. ‘You are my king,’ he said.
Arthur did not understand. What did his father mean? ‘Arthur,’ Sir Ector said slowly, ‘I
love you very much, but I am not really your father. Merlin, the famous man of magic,
brought you to me when you were a small child. I took you into my family because he
asked me. Now I know that you are the king.’He took the sword in his hand and pulled.‘I will try to be a good king,’ said Arthur. ‘And I will listen to your words, because you are
my father. Sir Kay, my brother, you will be an important knight and a friend to me.’
Then they went to the Archbishop and told him everything. The knights were angry.
They did not think that Arthur was really the king. So the Archbishop called all the knights
to the stone.
Arthur put the sword back into the stone. Every knight tried again to take it out, but it did
not move. Then they watched and Arthur pulled it out easily.
Everybody shouted, ‘Arthur is our king! Arthur is our king!’

Many people came to see Arthur. They were all happy because now they had a kind, good
king. He was strong and he was not afraid.
Merlin told Arthur the story of his parents. ‘Your father was King Uther and your mother
was Queen Igraine. When you were a baby, I took you to Avalon, a magic place. You were
born with magic in your life. You will be the best knight and you will be the greatest king.
You will live for a very long time.’

So King Arthur began a new life. He took his horse and went through the country with his
knights. Sometimes they had to fight bad men but they were not afraid. Arthur was a good
king, and his knights were brave. His country was a quiet place again.
Chapter  
The Round Table
King Arthur went to the north and the east with his knights and fought the Saxons. Then
they came back and stopped in the town of Camelot. Arthur made it the most important
town in the country. It was now his home, and the home of his brave knights.
One day King Arthur visited his friend, King Leodegraunce. He had a daughter and she
was the most beautiful woman in England. The daughter’s name was Guinevere. When he
went back to Camelot, Arthur could not stop thinking about her.
‘I love Guinevere and I want to marry her,’ Arthur told Merlin. King Leodegraunce was
very happy. Arthur was a good and brave man — a good husband for his lovely daughter.
So Arthur and Guinevere went to church and the Archbishop married them. Everybody
enjoyed a wonderful party in Camelot.
Then Merlin made a large round table for King Arthur’s knights in Camelot. There were
    places at the great wood and stone table. King Arthur gave his best and bravest
knights a place at the Round Table. Each knight had his place at the table, but no chair
was better than another chair. Nobody sat at the top of a round table and nobody sat atthe bottom.
‘The names of the Knights of the Round Table will be famous!’ cried Merlin.

Some knights died and other brave and good knights came to Camelot. One day a new
knight, Sir Pellinore, arrived at Camelot, and Arthur gave him a place at the Round Table.
For a long time there was one place with no knight. Merlin could see into the future.
‘Only a good knight, your best knight, will sit there,’ Merlin told King Arthur. ‘The place is
for your best knight, and he will come to it.’
After many years Sir Galahad came and sat in that place at the Round Table.
Chapter  
The Sword, Excalibur
King Arthur went round the country on his horse. He met his people and helped them. One
day he came to a great wood. When evening came, King Arthur was not out of the wood.
Then he saw a very big, beautiful castle in front of him.
He went nearer, and the great door of the castle opened. A woman came out.
‘King Arthur,’ she said. ‘I am Queen Annoure. Stay in my castle. It is getting dark. I will
give you food and a bed for the night.’
Arthur was hungry and thirsty. He was also tired. He looked at the dark sky. ‘Thank
you,’ he said, and he went in.
The Queen was kind to Arthur. She took his horse and gave it food and water. She took
Arthur to the dining-room of her castle and gave him bread, meat and wine. Then one of
Queen Annoure’s men took the King to his bedroom, and Arthur went to sleep.

The next morning, after breakfast, Queen Annoure wanted to see Arthur.
‘I would like to show you my castle and the beautiful things in it,’ she said. ‘I am the
richest person in the world. Look — everything here is mine.’
Arthur looked at her castle. They went from room to room, and each room was richer
than the room before that. There were beautiful things everywhere. Queen Annoure knew
a lot of magic, so she could make beautiful things.
Then they came out on to the top of the castle.
‘Look at those beautiful trees and gardens,’ said the Queen. ‘And look at those woods.
They are mine too. This is my country. And can you see that great wall round the castle?
Stay with me and be king here! You cannot leave. The door of the castle is shut, and that
great wall will stop you. My men are ready. Do not leave, or they will kill you.’
‘Your magic cannot hurt me, and your men cannot kill me,’ answered King Arthur.Then, with his sword in his hand and his helmet on his head, Arthur went out of the
castle, and through the door in the great wall. Nobody could stop him.

Queen Annoure sent one of her men to Sir Pellinore. He lived near her castle, and he had
a place at King Arthur’s Round Table.
‘Queen Annoure says that a very bad knight is on his way to her castle. He wants to kill
her and take her money. He is very near here, and he will go past your house. Please go
out and fight him for my queen,’ the man said to Sir Pellinore.
So Pellinore sat on his horse and waited. He did not know that King Arthur was the
‘very bad knight’. Arthur met Pellinore on the road.
‘Sir! Knight!’ cried Arthur. ‘Why are you waiting here? Do you want to fight me?’
‘Yes!’ shouted Sir Pellinore, and he took his sword in his hand.
Pellinore hit the King with his sword and Arthur fell from his horse. He stood up. He was
very angry and pulled out his sword. They had a long fight, and then the King’s sword
broke.
‘Ha!’ cried Sir Pellinore. ‘That is the end of the fight! I can kill you now!’
Arthur threw down his sword. He ran at Sir Pellinore and threw him on to the ground.
The two men were very tired, but they fought for a little longer. Then Arthur put his foot on
Pellinore’s head. Arthur took the helmet from his head, so Pellinore could see his face.
‘Shall I kill you? ‘ Arthur said.
Pellinore looked up and saw Arthur’s face.
‘My King!’ he cried. ‘I did not know it was you! Queen Annoure wanted me to fight a bad
knight on this road.’
‘I am not that bad knight! But I know you did not want to kill your king,’ said King Arthur.
Then the two men were friends again.

Sir Pellinore hurt King Arthur in the fight, so Merlin visited Arthur. In three days Arthur was
well again.
‘My sword broke in the fight,’ Arthur told Merlin.
‘That sword was not important,’ said Merlin. ‘ Come with me and you will find the best
sword in the world. It is a magic sword from Avalon, the place of magic.’
The King went with Merlin through a dark wood. The trees shut out the light from the
sun and Arthur could not see the sky. After a long time they came to an open place in the
mountains. There were no trees, but Arthur saw a strange lake. The water was very blue
and there were flowers next to it.
‘Now go to the lake,’ Merlin told Arthur. So Arthur left his horse with Merlin and walked
down to the magic lake. He looked across the quiet blue water - and there, in the centre ofthe lake, he suddenly saw an arm with a beautiful sword in its hand.
‘Go and take it,’ said Merlin. ‘It is the sword Excalibur. The Lady of the Lake made it for
you. She lives in her home in the water of the lake.’
A lovely young woman walked across the water and stood on the ground next to King
Arthur.
‘I am the Lady of the Lake. Your sword, Excalibur, is waiting for you.’
There was a boat on the water. King Arthur got into it and went to the middle of the
lake. He took the sword, and the arm went into the water. When Arthur came back to
Merlin, the Lady of the Lake was not there.
The sword was inside a scabbard. It was a very beautiful thing.
‘That is a magic scabbard,’ said Merlin. ‘No man can kill a person with that scabbard.
Have it with you always, because an evil woman will try to take the scabbard and the
sword away from you.’
King Arthur and Merlin went home again. Arthur’s knights listened happily to the stories
of his journey.
Chapter  
Morgan le Fay
Morgan le Fay was a queen, with a castle in the country of Gorres. She was a very bad
woman. She could do magic, but she only used her magic for bad things. King Arthur did
not know that Morgan le Fay hated him. She wanted King Arthur to die.
‘She is a kind friend,’ thought King Arthur. He did not know about her evil plans.
One day he went out on his horse to the woods. He wanted to catch animals, so he did
not take his sword. He left Excalibur with Queen Morgan le Fay at her castle.
‘I will come and get it on my way home,’ he told her.
Arthur went on his horse in front of his men. He went a long way into the dark woods
and then he could not find the way out again. When night came, he could not see his men
anywhere.
Arthur came to a lake. Then he saw a small light on the lake and he moved nearer and
nearer to it. The light was in a beautiful ship.
‘I will go onto the ship,’ thought Arthur.
When he was inside, he saw food and drink on the table and a bed. But he could not
see anybody there.
It was late and King Arthur was tired. ‘I will stay here tonight,’ he thought. ‘In the
morning I will find my way out of the woods. Then I will get Excalibur, and go home.’
So he late a good dinner on the ship and then he went to sleep. But when he woke up
in the morning, he was not in the ship. He was in a little room with a very small window. Hedid not know this place. The door was shut, so he could not get out. There were three
knights in the room.
‘This is the castle of Sir Damas. He is a very evil knight. He caught us too, and put us
here,’ one of the knights told Arthur. Sir Damas wants us to fight for him. Then we can
leave the castle. Or we will stay here and die.’
Some men came and took Arthur into a great room. Sir Damas was there.
‘Will you fight for me?’ Sir Damas asked. ‘That is a difficult question. Sir Damas,’
answered King Arthur. ‘I will fight for you. But when I win, I want those three knights. Then
we will all leave your castle.’
‘Yes,’ answered Sir Damas. ‘Fight for me and you can take the three knights with you.’
‘I will have to have a horse and a sword,’ King Arthur said.
Then a man came into the room. He brought a sword and gave it to Arthur.
‘This sword is from Queen Morgan le Fay. It is for you. King Arthur. You left it with her
and she heard about your fight today. She wants you to have Excalibur,’ said the man.
King Arthur looked at the sword. ‘Yes, this is Excalibur,’ he thought happily. No man
could kill him when he had the magic scabbard.
Sir Damas gave him food and drink and he got ready for the fight.

When Arthur was ready, he went outside. He saw another knight there, but he did not
know him. He could not see the knight’s face behind his helmet.
‘Who is this knight? Which castle does he come from? Which king sent him?’ thought
Arthur.
‘Now pull it out,’ he said to Arthur.
Arthur pulled it out. It came out as easily as a knife out of butter. Sir Ector saw this and
took Arthur’s hand.
‘You are my king,’ he said.
Only the next king can pull the sword out of the stone. Many people try, but they cannot
move the sword. Then young Arthur tries, and it comes out easily. Now he will be king. But
will he be a good king? Will his people love him? And will his life be happy?
The story of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table is very, very old. People
know that there was a king in Britain between the years     and    . He fought the
Saxons, from countries in the north of Europe, and perhaps this king was Arthur. He lived,
perhaps, in Wales or in the west of England — in Somerset or Cornwall.
People wrote stories about this king hundreds of years later, but they made the stories
more interesting and more exciting. At that time people were interested in magic, knights
and their ladies. So people fight with swords and use magic in these stories.
Who wrote these first stories? Nobody really knows, but different people in France and
Britain wrote about King Arthur and his knights. Not every book about them has the same
people and stories in it. One book (    ), by Sir Thomas Malory, is very famous. He used
French stories about King Arthur and wrote them in English.Chapter  
Arthur and Merlin
This very old story begins with Uther, a great king. He was a good man and he was king in
the south of Britain. Other places were very dangerous at that time, but people did not fight
in Uther’s country. Uther loved a beautiful woman, Igraine, and he wanted to marry her.
But she did not love him and he was very sad about that.
Merlin was a very clever man and he knew a lot of magic. He could change into an
animal or bird. Sometimes, when he used magic, nobody could see him. He also helped
people with his magic, and one day he came to King Uther.
‘You can marry Igraine,’ he said. ‘I will help you. But when you have a child, you will
have to give the boy to me.’
‘I will give him to you,’ said the King. He married Igraine and later they had a baby
son. They called him Arthur. When Arthur was three days old, a very old man arrived at
the door of the King’s house. It was Merlin. King Uther took the child in his arms and gave
him to Merlin. Merlin took the child away. He gave the boy, Arthur, to a good knight. His
name was Sir* Ector. So Arthur lived with Sir Ector and his son, Kay, and the two boys
were brothers.

A short time after this happened King Uther was very ill. He did not get better. He called for
Merlin because he wanted to talk about the future of his country. Merlin came and listened
to the King.
‘I know that I am going to die,’ King Uther said. ‘Who will be king after me?’
‘Call your knights and great men,’ Merlin told the King. ‘Tell them, "My son, Arthur, will
be the next king!”‘
King Uther told his people this before he died. But a lot of people wanted to be king, so
the knights and great men began to fight. There was no new king for a long time.

When Arthur was a young man. Merlin went to London. He visited the Archbishop, the
most important man in the Church.
‘Call the knights to London. Then we will find the new king,’ Merlin told the Archbishop.
The knights came to London. They met at a large church, and the Archbishop spoke to
them. When they came outside, they saw something strange in front of the church. It was
a very large stone with a great sword in it. The sun shone on the sword and it looked very
strong. The knights were excited, and started to talk about it.
* Sir is name for a knight.‘ Where did it come from?’
‘How did it get here?’
‘Who brought the stone here? We didn’t see anybody. And who put the sword in it?’
On the stone were these words:
ONLY THE KING
CAN TAKE THE SWORD FROM THE STONE
Every knight tried to pull the sword out of the stone. Nobody could do it — the sword did
not come out. The knights pulled and pulled. But they could not move the sword.
‘Our king is not here,’ said the Archbishop. ‘But I know that we will find him.’
Ten knights stayed and watched the stone. The Archbishop invited all the great men in
the country to London for a big fight. There were many big fights at that time. People
fought on horses with swords in their hands. The strongest and best knight always won.
‘Perhaps the new king will come to the fight,’ thought the Archbishop.
Sir Ector went to the fight with his two sons, Sir Kay and young Arthur. Arthur was now
sixteen years old. The young men wanted to fight with the other knights, but Sir Kay did
not have a sword. Arthur was a kind young man. He wanted to help.
‘There is a sword in a stone outside a church. I saw it on the way here. I will get it and
fight with it. Then you can have my sword,’ he said to his brother.
Arthur left Sir Kay and quickly went to the church. There were no knights outside by the
stone because they were at the fight. Arthur climbed down from his horse and went to the
stone. He did not read the words on the stone. He took the sword in his hand and pulled. It
came out of the stone easily.
He ran back to his horse with the sword. Some minutes later he met Sir Kay and Sir
Ector again, and he showed them the sword.
‘Where did that sword come from?’ Sir Ector asked. He knew about the words on the
stone.
They went back to the place outside the church, and Sir Ector put the sword in the
stone again.
‘Now pull it out,’ he said to Arthur.
Arthur pulled it out. It came out as easily as a knife out of butter. Sir Ector saw this and
took Arthur’s hand. ‘You are my king,’ he said.
Arthur did not understand. What did his father mean? ‘Arthur,’ Sir Ector said slowly, ‘I
love you very much, but I am not really your father. Merlin, the famous man of magic,
brought you to me when you were a small child. I took you into my family because he
asked me. Now I know that you are the king.’He took the sword in his hand and pulled.‘I will try to be a good king,’ said Arthur. ‘And I will listen to your words, because you are
my father. Sir Kay, my brother, you will be an important knight and a friend to me.’
Then they went to the Archbishop and told him everything. The knights were angry.
They did not think that Arthur was really the king. So the Archbishop called all the knights
to the stone.
Arthur put the sword back into the stone. Every knight tried again to take it out, but it did
not move. Then they watched and Arthur pulled it out easily.
Everybody shouted, ‘Arthur is our king! Arthur is our king!’

Many people came to see Arthur. They were all happy because now they had a kind, good
king. He was strong and he was not afraid.
Merlin told Arthur the story of his parents. ‘Your father was King Uther and your mother
was Queen Igraine. When you were a baby, I took you to Avalon, a magic place. You were
born with magic in your life. You will be the best knight and you will be the greatest king.
You will live for a very long time.’

So King Arthur began a new life. He took his horse and went through the country with his
knights. Sometimes they had to fight bad men but they were not afraid. Arthur was a good
king, and his knights were brave. His country was a quiet place again.
Chapter  
The Round Table
King Arthur went to the north and the east with his knights and fought the Saxons. Then
they came back and stopped in the town of Camelot. Arthur made it the most important
town in the country. It was now his home, and the home of his brave knights.
One day King Arthur visited his friend, King Leodegraunce. He had a daughter and she
was the most beautiful woman in England. The daughter’s name was Guinevere. When he
went back to Camelot, Arthur could not stop thinking about her.
‘I love Guinevere and I want to marry her,’ Arthur told Merlin. King Leodegraunce was
very happy. Arthur was a good and brave man — a good husband for his lovely daughter.
So Arthur and Guinevere went to church and the Archbishop married them. Everybody
enjoyed a wonderful party in Camelot.
Then Merlin made a large round table for King Arthur’s knights in Camelot. There were
    places at the great wood and stone table. King Arthur gave his best and bravest
knights a place at the Round Table. Each knight had his place at the table, but no chair
was better than another chair. Nobody sat at the top of a round table and nobody sat atthe bottom.
‘The names of the Knights of the Round Table will be famous!’ cried Merlin.

Some knights died and other brave and good knights came to Camelot. One day a new
knight, Sir Pellinore, arrived at Camelot, and Arthur gave him a place at the Round Table.
For a long time there was one place with no knight. Merlin could see into the future.
‘Only a good knight, your best knight, will sit there,’ Merlin told King Arthur. ‘The place is
for your best knight, and he will come to it.’
After many years Sir Galahad came and sat in that place at the Round Table.
Chapter  
The Sword, Excalibur
King Arthur went round the country on his horse. He met his people and helped them. One
day he came to a great wood. When evening came, King Arthur was not out of the wood.
Then he saw a very big, beautiful castle in front of him.
He went nearer, and the great door of the castle opened. A woman came out.
‘King Arthur,’ she said. ‘I am Queen Annoure. Stay in my castle. It is getting dark. I will
give you food and a bed for the night.’
Arthur was hungry and thirsty. He was also tired. He looked at the dark sky. ‘Thank
you,’ he said, and he went in.
The Queen was kind to Arthur. She took his horse and gave it food and water. She took
Arthur to the dining-room of her castle and gave him bread, meat and wine. Then one of
Queen Annoure’s men took the King to his bedroom, and Arthur went to sleep.

The next morning, after breakfast, Queen Annoure wanted to see Arthur.
‘I would like to show you my castle and the beautiful things in it,’ she said. ‘I am the
richest person in the world. Look — everything here is mine.’
Arthur looked at her castle. They went from room to room, and each room was richer
than the room before that. There were beautiful things everywhere. Queen Annoure knew
a lot of magic, so she could make beautiful things.
Then they came out on to the top of the castle.
‘Look at those beautiful trees and gardens,’ said the Queen. ‘And look at those woods.
They are mine too. This is my country. And can you see that great wall round the castle?
Stay with me and be king here! You cannot leave. The door of the castle is shut, and that
great wall will stop you. My men are ready. Do not leave, or they will kill you.’
‘Your magic cannot hurt me, and your men cannot kill me,’ answered King Arthur.Then, with his sword in his hand and his helmet on his head, Arthur went out of the
castle, and through the door in the great wall. Nobody could stop him.

Queen Annoure sent one of her men to Sir Pellinore. He lived near her castle, and he had
a place at King Arthur’s Round Table.
‘Queen Annoure says that a very bad knight is on his way to her castle. He wants to kill
her and take her money. He is very near here, and he will go past your house. Please go
out and fight him for my queen,’ the man said to Sir Pellinore.
So Pellinore sat on his horse and waited. He did not know that King Arthur was the
‘very bad knight’. Arthur met Pellinore on the road.
‘Sir! Knight!’ cried Arthur. ‘Why are you waiting here? Do you want to fight me?’
‘Yes!’ shouted Sir Pellinore, and he took his sword in his hand.
Pellinore hit the King with his sword and Arthur fell from his horse. He stood up. He was
very angry and pulled out his sword. They had a long fight, and then the King’s sword
broke.
‘Ha!’ cried Sir Pellinore. ‘That is the end of the fight! I can kill you now!’
Arthur threw down his sword. He ran at Sir Pellinore and threw him on to the ground.
The two men were very tired, but they fought for a little longer. Then Arthur put his foot on
Pellinore’s head. Arthur took the helmet from his head, so Pellinore could see his face.
‘Shall I kill you? ‘ Arthur said.
Pellinore looked up and saw Arthur’s face.
‘My King!’ he cried. ‘I did not know it was you! Queen Annoure wanted me to fight a bad
knight on this road.’
‘I am not that bad knight! But I know you did not want to kill your king,’ said King Arthur.
Then the two men were friends again.

Sir Pellinore hurt King Arthur in the fight, so Merlin visited Arthur. In three days Arthur was
well again.
‘My sword broke in the fight,’ Arthur told Merlin.
‘That sword was not important,’ said Merlin. ‘ Come with me and you will find the best
sword in the world. It is a magic sword from Avalon, the place of magic.’
The King went with Merlin through a dark wood. The trees shut out the light from the
sun and Arthur could not see the sky. After a long time they came to an open place in the
mountains. There were no trees, but Arthur saw a strange lake. The water was very blue
and there were flowers next to it.
‘Now go to the lake,’ Merlin told Arthur. So Arthur left his horse with Merlin and walked
down to the magic lake. He looked across the quiet blue water - and there, in the centre ofthe lake, he suddenly saw an arm with a beautiful sword in its hand.
‘Go and take it,’ said Merlin. ‘It is the sword Excalibur. The Lady of the Lake made it for
you. She lives in her home in the water of the lake.’
A lovely young woman walked across the water and stood on the ground next to King
Arthur.
‘I am the Lady of the Lake. Your sword, Excalibur, is waiting for you.’
There was a boat on the water. King Arthur got into it and went to the middle of the
lake. He took the sword, and the arm went into the water. When Arthur came back to
Merlin, the Lady of the Lake was not there.
The sword was inside a scabbard. It was a very beautiful thing.
‘That is a magic scabbard,’ said Merlin. ‘No man can kill a person with that scabbard.
Have it with you always, because an evil woman will try to take the scabbard and the
sword away from you.’
King Arthur and Merlin went home again. Arthur’s knights listened happily to the stories
of his journey.
Chapter  
Morgan le Fay
Morgan le Fay was a queen, with a castle in the country of Gorres. She was a very bad
woman. She could do magic, but she only used her magic for bad things. King Arthur did
not know that Morgan le Fay hated him. She wanted King Arthur to die.
‘She is a kind friend,’ thought King Arthur. He did not know about her evil plans.
One day he went out on his horse to the woods. He wanted to catch animals, so he did
not take his sword. He left Excalibur with Queen Morgan le Fay at her castle.
‘I will come and get it on my way home,’ he told her.
Arthur went on his horse in front of his men. He went a long way into the dark woods
and then he could not find the way out again. When night came, he could not see his men
anywhere.
Arthur came to a lake. Then he saw a small light on the lake and he moved nearer and
nearer to it. The light was in a beautiful ship.
‘I will go onto the ship,’ thought Arthur.
When he was inside, he saw food and drink on the table and a bed. But he could not
see anybody there.
It was late and King Arthur was tired. ‘I will stay here tonight,’ he thought. ‘In the
morning I will find my way out of the woods. Then I will get Excalibur, and go home.’
So he late a good dinner on the ship and then he went to sleep. But when he woke up
in the morning, he was not in the ship. He was in a little room with a very small window. Hedid not know this place. The door was shut, so he could not get out. There were three
knights in the room.
‘This is the castle of Sir Damas. He is a very evil knight. He caught us too, and put us
here,’ one of the knights told Arthur. Sir Damas wants us to fight for him. Then we can
leave the castle. Or we will stay here and die.’
Some men came and took Arthur into a great room. Sir Damas was there.
‘Will you fight for me?’ Sir Damas asked. ‘That is a difficult question. Sir Damas,’
answered King Arthur. ‘I will fight for you. But when I win, I want those three knights. Then
we will all leave your castle.’
‘Yes,’ answered Sir Damas. ‘Fight for me and you can take the three knights with you.’
‘I will have to have a horse and a sword,’ King Arthur said.
Then a man came into the room. He brought a sword and gave it to Arthur.
‘This sword is from Queen Morgan le Fay. It is for you. King Arthur. You left it with her
and she heard about your fight to
The other knight also did not know King Arthur under his helmet.
The fight began. King Arthur was not happy. He could not hurt the other knight with his
sword, because the sword was not Excalibur! It was a sword from Morgan le Fay’s magic.
It looked the same as Excalibur, but it was different. When the other knight hit Arthur with
his sword, it hurt him. Arthur felt very weak.
‘His sword is very strong,’ thought Arthur.
King Arthur was very brave and he did not stop fighting. Many people came and
watched the fight. But then Arthur’s sword broke. He fell onto the ground.
‘Sir!’ the other knight cried.’ Say that I am the winner! Then I will not kill you!’
‘No!’ cried Arthur. ‘I will fight - and fight.’
King Arthur took the end of his sword. He hit the knight on the head as hard as he could
with it. The knight fell back and hit the ground. His sword fell from his hand, and Arthur
quickly took it. When he felt the sword in his hand, he knew. It was Excalibur!
Then Arthur saw his scabbard next to the knight. He jumped up and took that too.
‘Tell me — who are you? What is your name?’ asked Arthur.
The knight stood up and answered, ‘I am Sir Accolon, Knight of the Round Table. I amone of King Arthur’s knights.’
‘Tell me — why did you fight me, your king?’
‘Sir, I did not know you. I came here because Queen Morgan le Fay sent me. She said
to me, “King Arthur is in the castle of Sir Damas. You have to go and fight Sir Damas.
Then he will not kill your king.” Now I know that you are not Sir Damas. I am very sorry,’
said Sir Accolon.
‘And who gave you that sword?’ asked Arthur.
‘Queen Morgan le Fay gave it to me. She said, “Here is King Arthur’s sword, Excalibur,
and its scabbard. Take them for the fight. Then you will fight well and your king can leave
the castle of that evil knight, Sir Damas.”‘
King Arthur was very angry when he heard Accolon’s story. ‘I know now that you did not
want to kill me. Sir Accolon. You are a brave knight. Now I understand Morgan le Fay’s evil
plan. I had a conversation with Merlin, the man of good magic. I have to be careful with my
sword and scabbard, he said. But I did not listen.’
‘Now pull it out,’ he said to Arthur.
Arthur pulled it out. It came out as easily as a knife out of butter. Sir Ector saw this and
took Arthur’s hand.
‘You are my king,’ he said.
Only the next king can pull the sword out of the stone. Many people try, but they cannot
move the sword. Then young Arthur tries, and it comes out easily. Now he will be king. But
will he be a good king? Will his people love him? And will his life be happy?
The story of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table is very, very old. People
know that there was a king in Britain between the years     and    . He fought the
Saxons, from countries in the north of Europe, and perhaps this king was Arthur. He lived,
perhaps, in Wales or in the west of England — in Somerset or Cornwall.
People wrote stories about this king hundreds of years later, but they made the stories
more interesting and more exciting. At that time people were interested in magic, knights
and their ladies. So people fight with swords and use magic in these stories.
Who wrote these first stories? Nobody really knows, but different people in France and
Britain wrote about King Arthur and his knights. Not every book about them has the same
people and stories in it. One book (    ), by Sir Thomas Malory, is very famous. He used
French stories about King Arthur and wrote them in English.Chapter  
Arthur and Merlin
This very old story begins with Uther, a great king. He was a good man and he was king in
the south of Britain. Other places were very dangerous at that time, but people did not fight
in Uther’s country. Uther loved a beautiful woman, Igraine, and he wanted to marry her.
But she did not love him and he was very sad about that.
Merlin was a very clever man and he knew a lot of magic. He could change into an
animal or bird. Sometimes, when he used magic, nobody could see him. He also helped
people with his magic, and one day he came to King Uther.
‘You can marry Igraine,’ he said. ‘I will help you. But when you have a child, you will
have to give the boy to me.’
‘I will give him to you,’ said the King. He married Igraine and later they had a baby
son. They called him Arthur. When Arthur was three days old, a very old man arrived at
the door of the King’s house. It was Merlin. King Uther took the child in his arms and gave
him to Merlin. Merlin took the child away. He gave the boy, Arthur, to a good knight. His
name was Sir* Ector. So Arthur lived with Sir Ector and his son, Kay, and the two boys
were brothers.
A short time after this happened King Uther was very ill. He did not get better. He called for
Merlin because he wanted to talk about the future of his country. Merlin came and listened
to the King.
‘I know that I am going to die,’ King Uther said. ‘Who will be king after me?’
‘Call your knights and great men,’ Merlin told the King. ‘Tell them, "My son, Arthur, will
be the next king!”‘
King Uther told his people this before he died. But a lot of people wanted to be king, so
the knights and great men began to fight. There was no new king for a long time.
When Arthur was a young man. Merlin went to London. He visited the Archbishop, the
most important man in the Church.
‘Call the knights to London. Then we will find the new king,’ Merlin told the Archbishop.
The knights came to London. They met at a large church, and the Archbishop spoke to
them. When they came outside, they saw something strange in front of the church. It was
a very large stone with a great sword in it. The sun shone on the sword and it looked very
strong. The knights were excited, and started to talk about it.
* Sir is name for a knight.‘ Where did it come from?’
‘How did it get here?’
‘Who brought the stone here? We didn’t see anybody. And who put the sword in it?’
On the stone were these words:
ONLY THE KING
CAN TAKE THE SWORD FROM THE STONE
Every knight tried to pull the sword out of the stone. Nobody could do it — the sword did
not come out. The knights pulled and pulled. But they could not move the sword.
‘Our king is not here,’ said the Archbishop. ‘But I know that we will find him.’
Ten knights stayed and watched the stone. The Archbishop invited all the great men in
the country to London for a big fight. There were many big fights at that time. People
fought on horses with swords in their hands. The strongest and best knight always won.
‘Perhaps the new king will come to the fight,’ thought the Archbishop.
Sir Ector went to the fight with his two sons, Sir Kay and young Arthur. Arthur was now
sixteen years old. The young men wanted to fight with the other knights, but Sir Kay did
not have a sword. Arthur was a kind young man. He wanted to help.
‘There is a sword in a stone outside a church. I saw it on the way here. I will get it and
fight with it. Then you can have my sword,’ he said to his brother.
Arthur left Sir Kay and quickly went to the church. There were no knights outside by the
stone because they were at the fight. Arthur climbed down from his horse and went to the
stone. He did not read the words on the stone. He took the sword in his hand and pulled. It
came out of the stone easily.
He ran back to his horse with the sword. Some minutes later he met Sir Kay and Sir
Ector again, and he showed them the sword.
‘Where did that sword come from?’ Sir Ector asked. He knew about the words on the
stone.
They went back to the place outside the church, and Sir Ector put the sword in the
stone again.
‘Now pull it out,’ he said to Arthur.
Arthur pulled it out. It came out as easily as a knife out of butter. Sir Ector saw this and
took Arthur’s hand. ‘You are my king,’ he said.
Arthur did not understand. What did his father mean? ‘Arthur,’ Sir Ector said slowly, ‘I
love you very much, but I am not really your father. Merlin, the famous man of magic,
brought you to me when you were a small child. I took you into my family because he
asked me. Now I know that you are the king.’He took the sword in his hand and pulled.‘I will try to be a good king,’ said Arthur. ‘And I will listen to your words, because you are
my father. Sir Kay, my brother, you will be an important knight and a friend to me.’
Then they went to the Archbishop and told him everything. The knights were angry.
They did not think that Arthur was really the king. So the Archbishop called all the knights
to the stone.
Arthur put the sword back into the stone. Every knight tried again to take it out, but it did
not move. Then they watched and Arthur pulled it out easily.
Everybody shouted, ‘Arthur is our king! Arthur is our king!’

Many people came to see Arthur. They were all happy because now they had a kind, good
king. He was strong and he was not afraid.
Merlin told Arthur the story of his parents. ‘Your father was King Uther and your mother
was Queen Igraine. When you were a baby, I took you to Avalon, a magic place. You were
born with magic in your life. You will be the best knight and you will be the greatest king.
You will live for a very long time.’

So King Arthur began a new life. He took his horse and went through the country with his
knights. Sometimes they had to fight bad men but they were not afraid. Arthur was a good
king, and his knights were brave. His country was a quiet place again.
Chapter  
The Round Table
King Arthur went to the north and the east with his knights and fought the Saxons. Then
they came back and stopped in the town of Camelot. Arthur made it the most important
town in the country. It was now his home, and the home of his brave knights.
One day King Arthur visited his friend, King Leodegraunce. He had a daughter and she
was the most beautiful woman in England. The daughter’s name was Guinevere. When he
went back to Camelot, Arthur could not stop thinking about her.
‘I love Guinevere and I want to marry her,’ Arthur told Merlin. King Leodegraunce was
very happy. Arthur was a good and brave man — a good husband for his lovely daughter.
So Arthur and Guinevere went to church and the Archbishop married them. Everybody
enjoyed a wonderful party in Camelot.
Then Merlin made a large round table for King Arthur’s knights in Camelot. There were
    places at the great wood and stone table. King Arthur gave his best and bravest
knights a place at the Round Table. Each knight had his place at the table, but no chair
was better than another chair. Nobody sat at the top of a round table and nobody sat atthe bottom.
‘The names of the Knights of the Round Table will be famous!’ cried Merlin.

Some knights died and other brave and good knights came to Camelot. One day a new
knight, Sir Pellinore, arrived at Camelot, and Arthur gave him a place at the Round Table.
For a long time there was one place with no knight. Merlin could see into the future.
‘Only a good knight, your best knight, will sit there,’ Merlin told King Arthur. ‘The place is
for your best knight, and he will come to it.’
After many years Sir Galahad came and sat in that place at the Round Table.
Chapter  
The Sword, Excalibur
King Arthur went round the country on his horse. He met his people and helped them. One
day he came to a great wood. When evening came, King Arthur was not out of the wood.
Then he saw a very big, beautiful castle in front of him.
He went nearer, and the great door of the castle opened. A woman came out.
‘King Arthur,’ she said. ‘I am Queen Annoure. Stay in my castle. It is getting dark. I will
give you food and a bed for the night.’
Arthur was hungry and thirsty. He was also tired. He looked at the dark sky. ‘Thank
you,’ he said, and he went in.
The Queen was kind to Arthur. She took his horse and gave it food and water. She took
Arthur to the dining-room of her castle and gave him bread, meat and wine. Then one of
Queen Annoure’s men took the King to his bedroom, and Arthur went to sleep.

The next morning, after breakfast, Queen Annoure wanted to see Arthur.
‘I would like to show you my castle and the beautiful things in it,’ she said. ‘I am the
richest person in the world. Look — everything here is mine.’
Arthur looked at her castle. They went from room to room, and each room was richer
than the room before that. There were beautiful things everywhere. Queen Annoure knew
a lot of magic, so she could make beautiful things.
Then they came out on to the top of the castle.
‘Look at those beautiful trees and gardens,’ said the Queen. ‘And look at those woods.
They are mine too. This is my country. And can you see that great wall round the castle?
Stay with me and be king here! You cannot leave. The door of the castle is shut, and that
great wall will stop you. My men are ready. Do not leave, or they will kill you.’
‘Your magic cannot hurt me, and your men cannot kill me,’ answered King Arthur.Then, with his sword in his hand and his helmet on his head, Arthur went out of the
castle, and through the door in the great wall. Nobody could stop him.

Queen Annoure sent one of her men to Sir Pellinore. He lived near her castle, and he had
a place at King Arthur’s Round Table.
‘Queen Annoure says that a very bad knight is on his way to her castle. He wants to kill
her and take her money. He is very near here, and he will go past your house. Please go
out and fight him for my queen,’ the man said to Sir Pellinore.
So Pellinore sat on his horse and waited. He did not know that King Arthur was the
‘very bad knight’. Arthur met Pellinore on the road.
‘Sir! Knight!’ cried Arthur. ‘Why are you waiting here? Do you want to fight me?’
‘Yes!’ shouted Sir Pellinore, and he took his sword in his hand.
Pellinore hit the King with his sword and Arthur fell from his horse. He stood up. He was
very angry and pulled out his sword. They had a long fight, and then the King’s sword
broke.
‘Ha!’ cried Sir Pellinore. ‘That is the end of the fight! I can kill you now!’
Arthur threw down his sword. He ran at Sir Pellinore and threw him on to the ground.
The two men were very tired, but they fought for a little longer. Then Arthur put his foot on
Pellinore’s head. Arthur took the helmet from his head, so Pellinore could see his face.
‘Shall I kill you? ‘ Arthur said.
Pellinore looked up and saw Arthur’s face.
‘My King!’ he cried. ‘I did not know it was you! Queen Annoure wanted me to fight a bad
knight on this road.’
‘I am not that bad knight! But I know you did not want to kill your king,’ said King Arthur.
Then the two men were friends again.

Sir Pellinore hurt King Arthur in the fight, so Merlin visited Arthur. In three days Arthur was
well again.
‘My sword broke in the fight,’ Arthur told Merlin.
‘That sword was not important,’ said Merlin. ‘ Come with me and you will find the best
sword in the world. It is a magic sword from Avalon, the place of magic.’
The King went with Merlin through a dark wood. The trees shut out the light from the
sun and Arthur could not see the sky. After a long time they came to an open place in the
mountains. There were no trees, but Arthur saw a strange lake. The water was very blue
and there were flowers next to it.
‘Now go to the lake,’ Merlin told Arthur. So Arthur left his horse with Merlin and walked
down to the magic lake. He looked across the quiet blue water - and there, in the centre ofthe lake, he suddenly saw an arm with a beautiful sword in its hand.
‘Go and take it,’ said Merlin. ‘It is the sword Excalibur. The Lady of the Lake made it for
you. She lives in her home in the water of the lake.’
A lovely young woman walked across the water and stood on the ground next to King
Arthur.
‘I am the Lady of the Lake. Your sword, Excalibur, is waiting for you.’
There was a boat on the water. King Arthur got into it and went to the middle of the
lake. He took the sword, and the arm went into the water. When Arthur came back to
Merlin, the Lady of the Lake was not there.
The sword was inside a scabbard. It was a very beautiful thing.
‘That is a magic scabbard,’ said Merlin. ‘No man can kill a person with that scabbard.
Have it with you always, because an evil woman will try to take the scabbard and the
sword away from you.’
King Arthur and Merlin went home again. Arthur’s knights listened happily to the stories
of his journey.
Chapter  
Morgan le Fay
Morgan le Fay was a queen, with a castle in the country of Gorres. She was a very bad
woman. She could do magic, but she only used her magic for bad things. King Arthur did
not know that Morgan le Fay hated him. She wanted King Arthur to die.
‘She is a kind friend,’ thought King Arthur. He did not know about her evil plans.
One day he went out on his horse to the woods. He wanted to catch animals, so he did
not take his sword. He left Excalibur with Queen Morgan le Fay at her castle.
‘I will come and get it on my way home,’ he told her.
Arthur went on his horse in front of his men. He went a long way into the dark woods
and then he could not find the way out again. When night came, he could not see his men
anywhere.
Arthur came to a lake. Then he saw a small light on the lake and he moved nearer and
nearer to it. The light was in a beautiful ship.
‘I will go onto the ship,’ thought Arthur.
When he was inside, he saw food and drink on the table and a bed. But he could not
see anybody there.
It was late and King Arthur was tired. ‘I will stay here tonight,’ he thought. ‘In the
morning I will find my way out of the woods. Then I will get Excalibur, and go home.’
So he late a good dinner on the ship and then he went to sleep. But when he woke up
in the morning, he was not in the ship. He was in a little room with a very small window. Hedid not know this place. The door was shut, so he could not get out. There were three
knights in the room.
‘This is the castle of Sir Damas. He is a very evil knight. He caught us too, and put us
here,’ one of the knights told Arthur. Sir Damas wants us to fight for him. Then we can
leave the castle. Or we will stay here and die.’
Some men came and took Arthur into a great room. Sir Damas was there.
‘Will you fight for me?’ Sir Damas asked. ‘That is a difficult question. Sir Damas,’
answered King Arthur. ‘I will fight for you. But when I win, I want those three knights. Then
we will all leave your castle.’
‘Yes,’ answered Sir Damas. ‘Fight for me and you can take the three knights with you.’
‘I will have to have a horse and a sword,’ King Arthur said.
Then a man came into the room. He brought a sword and gave it to Arthur.
‘This sword is from Queen Morgan le Fay. It is for you. King Arthur. You left it with her
and she heard about your fight to
King Arthur went back to Sir Damas s castle with Sir Accolon, and they found the three
knights. There was a great fight with Sir Damas, arid King Arthur won with Excalibur. But
after the fight he had a lot of wounds.
‘Bring Sir Damas to me!‘ said the King.
Sir Damas came to King Arthur.
‘Why did you want me to fight for you? Why did I have to fight Sir Accolon, one of my
knights?‘ King Arthur asked him.
‘Because Queen Morgan le Fay wanted it,’ answered Sir Damas.
‘You are not a brave man,’ said Arthur, ‘and now you will not be a knight. I am taking
your castle from you, and everything in it. I am going to give it to your younger brother.’
Then King Arthur left. He did not go to Camelot because he wanted to get well first.

Morgan le Fay went to stay at Camelot, and King Arthur was not there.
‘King Arthur is dead now!‘ she thought. But then her men came to Camelot, and they
told her about the fight. ‘King Arthur did not die in the fight,’ they said.
Morgan le Fay went to Queen Guinevere and said, ‘I have to go back to my country
now. My people want me there.’
Queen Guinevere knew nothing about Morgan le Fay’s magic and her evil ideas.
‘Don’t go,’ she answered. ‘The King is coming back to Camelot. I think he will be here
tomorrow or the next day. He will be happy when he sees you.’
‘No! No!‘ said Morgan le Fay. ‘I cannot stay — I have to go.’
And so she left Camelot on her black horse.
Morgan le Fay and her black horse did not stop that day or that night. When she met
people on her journey, she asked them:
‘Where is King Arthur? Tell me, where is the King?’
After a long time she heard about him.
‘The King is ill,’ a man told her. ‘He fought a knight at Sir Damas’s castle. The knight
wounded King Arthur, so he cannot go back to Camelot. He is staying with the nuns. They
are good women, and he will get better there with their help.’
The nuns worked for the church and helped people. They were very kind and lived in a
large, quiet house. People could stay there when they wanted their help.
Morgan le Fay said thank you to the man and went to visit the nuns.
‘I am on a long journey, and I am hungry and thirsty,’ she said. ‘Please can I eat
something?’
The nuns brought food and drink and gave it to Morgan le Fay.
‘Is there another visitor here?‘ she asked.
‘Yes,’ the nuns said. ‘King Arthur is here. A knight’s sword wounded him in a fight. He
will leave when his wounds are better. He is sleeping. You can speak to him when he
wakes up.’
‘Oh! The King!‘ Morgan le Fay cried. ‘I cannot wait because I have to go home. But
please, can I look at him? I love our king and I would like to see him!’
‘We cannot wake up the King! He is in his bed and he is ill,’ said one of the nuns.
‘Please, let me sit next to him for a minute or two. I want to see his face!‘ asked Morgan
le Fay again.
The nun thought about it. ‘Yes, all right. You can go and look at him. But do not make
any noise. Do not wake him up.’
Morgan le Fay went into King Arthur’s room. She stood next to him and watched him.
The King was asleep, but he had his hand on Excalibur. She could not take the sword
away because she did not want to wake him. Then she saw the scabbard at the end of the
bed. Quickly she took it and put it under her clothes. Nobody could see it there. She went
out of the room and said thank you and goodbye to the nuns. Then Morgan le Fay got on
her black horse and left.

Later, when King Arthur opened his eyes, he could not see the scabbard.
‘Something is wrong,’ he thought. ‘Where is the scabbard of my sword, Excalibur?’
He was very angry and called a nun. ‘Did anybody come into this room when I was
asleep?‘ he asked her.
‘Queen Morgan le Fay came,’ she said. ’But no other person. She could not stay, but
she came into the room. She loves you and she wanted to see your face.’‘Thank you,’ said the King. ‘Thank you for your help. I came here to your house when I
was ill. You were kind and good to me. My wounds are getting better. But I have to go now
— it is important! I have to follow Queen Morgan le Fay. When she visited me in my room,
she took the scabbard of my sword, Excalibur.’
The nuns did not want him to leave because he was not ready. But they helped him
onto his horse, and he left their house.

King Arthur did not stop for hours. Then he came to a river. There was a man there with
his animals.
‘Did anybody come this way?‘ asked the King.
‘Yes,’ answered the man. ‘A beautiful woman came on a black horse. She went across
the river here very quickly and did not stop.’
King Arthur went over the river, through woods and up a mountain. Then he looked
down, and he saw Morgan le Fay a long way away.
Morgan le Fay looked back and she saw the King. The ground was hard and there
were a lot of stones. She went across the stones and arrived at a lake. The lake was
black. No animal drank the water. No birds sang in the trees.
Queen Morgan le Fay got off her black horse and took out the scabbard of King
Arthur’s sword, Excalibur. She threw it into the water.
‘King Arthur will never have it!’ she cried. ‘That scabbard will not help him now when
men fight him. Nobody will find it here — at the bottom of this lake!‘
Then she quickly went away on her horse, back to her castle.
King Arthur followed Morgan le Fay and came to the same place. He could not see the
Queen.
‘Which way did she go?’ King Arthur thought. ‘Where did the horse go? I cannot follow
the horse’s feet across these stones.’ King Arthur looked and looked. He saw nothing, so
he went home to Camelot without his scabbard.
King Arthur had Excalibur. But because of the evil Queen, he did not have the magic
scabbard. It stayed at the bottom of the black lake and he never found it.
Chapter  
Vivien and Merlin
When King Arthur was a young man, Merlin, the man of magic helped him in every way.
He taught him to be a good king and a brave knight. Merlin helped Arthur to be kind to
everybody in his country, so they all loved him. With Merlin’s help, Arthur built the beautiful
city, Camelot. Camelot had roads and houses and a great castle.
Later, when Merlin was an old man, he came to King Arthur again.‘I have to say goodbye now,’ said Merlin. ‘Goodbye? Why, Merlin?‘ asked King Arthur. ‘I
am going to die,’ Merlin told him. ‘I will not always be here. In the future, when you make
mistakes, my magic will not help you.’
‘Oh Merlin!‘ said King Arthur sadly. ‘I do not want you to go!’
‘I am going down into a dark cave, and I cannot come back from that cave.’
‘But Merlin,’ King Arthur cried, ‘you know a lot of magic. Can you not stop this? Do you
have to die?’
‘I cannot stop it,’ answered Merlin. ‘You have to be a strong king without me now!‘

After Merlin spoke to King Arthur, Lady Vivien came to Camelot. Before this time, she lived
with the Lady of the Lake. The Lady of the Lake made Excalibur and she knew a lot of
magic.
Vivien learned magic from the Lady of the Lake. Then she went to Camelot and studied
with Merlin. When she knew all Merlin’s magic, she thought, ‘He is an old man. I cannot kill
him because his magic is strong. But I can send him away somewhere so he cannot come
back. Then I will have the greatest and strongest magic in the world.’
Vivien went on a long journey with Merlin to another country. They climbed a high grey
mountain and came to a dark place with a lot of trees and a small river. There they saw a
magic cave inside the mountain.
‘The mouth of the cave is open now,’ said Merlin to Vivien. ‘When you say the magic
words, the mouth of the cave will shut.’
‘I know these magic words. But which words will open it again?‘ asked Vivien.
‘I do not know,’ said Merlin.
‘I want to look inside the cave,’ Vivien said. ‘Please come with me. Show me the way.’
So Merlin went into the cave first, but Vivien ran out quickly. She shouted the magic
words, and the mouth of the cave shut loudly. Merlin was inside and could not get out.
Some people say that the great Merlin is there now, inside the cave. One day, they say,
somebody will break open the big stone door of the cave. Then Merlin will come out again
and help the world with his magic. He will, they say, teach everybody to be good and
happy.
But after that sad day, King Arthur had no help from his friend, Merlin.
Chapter  
Sir Meligrance
It was the month of May. The weather was warm and the sky was blue. The flowers
looked very beautiful in the sun.
Queen Guinevere called her ten knights and her ladies and said, ‘Let’s enjoy thisbeautiful day. We can look for some lovely spring flowers. Let’s take some food and drink
and have a party in the wood.’
So Guinevere left the castle with her knights and her ladies. Some boys from the castle
went with them and carried their things.
All day they enjoyed the sun. In the afternoon they sat under the tall green trees. They
ate and they talked. Then evening came.
‘Now let’s go home,’ the Queen said. ‘King Arthur is waiting for us at Camelot.’
They were all ready when suddenly twenty men with swords and helmets jumped out
from the trees.
‘Stand there and do not move!’ one of the men shouted. ‘Or we will kill you all!’
It was Sir Meligrance, with his men. He loved Queen Guinevere and he wanted to take
her to his castle.
‘I love you,’ he said, ’and you are here without the King!’
‘Sir Meligrance,’ cried the Queen. ‘King Arthur made you a Knight of the Round Table!
A knight has to be a good man. How can you take away your king’s wife?’
‘I only know that I love you. My men will help me. They will fight your knights,’ answered
Sir Meligrance.
Guinevere’s ten knights turned to Sir Meligrance.
‘We will not stand here when you take our queen away, Sir! We will stop you.’
Sir Meligrance and his men had better swords and helmets than Guinevere’s knights.
His men were ready — Guinevere’s men were only there for the flowers.
The tight began. Guinevere’s knights were brave and fought hard. But they could not
win. Sir Meligrance’s men were too strong for them. And there were twenty of them. They
wounded all Guinevere’s good knights in the fight.
‘Stop!’ cried Guinevere to her knights. ‘Or they will kill you.’ She looked at Sir
Meligrance. ‘All right. Sir Meligrance. I will come with you.’
She was very angry and afraid. ‘Come with me, my brave knights, to Sir Meligrance’s
castle.’
So Queen Guinevere and her people went to the castle, but first the Queen spoke to
one of the boys.
‘You have a good, fast horse,’ she said to him quietly. ‘Go quickly to Camelot! Tell the
King and Sir Lancelot!‘
Sir Meligrance saw the boy when he left, but his men could not catch him.

The boy arrived at Camelot and saw Sir Lancelot. Sir Lancelot was the strongest of King
Arthur’s knights. When he heard the story, Lancelot quickly put his helmet on his head and
took his sword.
‘I will go now to Sir Meligrance’s castle and find the Queen,’ said Sir Lancelot to theboy. ‘Go and tell the King.’
When Lancelot came near the castle, he thought, ‘Sir Meligrance’s men will wait next to
the road. They will come out when I go past. So I will not take the road - I will go through
the wood.’
Lancelot was right. Sir Meligrance’s men waited by the road, but they did not see the
knight.
Sir Meligrance saw Lancelot outside the castle. His men were by the road, and
suddenly he was afraid. Lancelot was brave and strong. He could fight Sir Meligrance and
win.
So Sir Meligrance went to Queen Guinevere and said, ‘Oh, my Queen, I am sorry!
Please say you are not angry with me. I will take you back to Camelot and I will fight for
King Arthur. I want to be a good knight.’
The Queen did not know about Lancelot and Sir Meligrance’s men so she answered,
‘Yes, you are sorry. I can see that. I will not be angry with you.’

When Lancelot arrived at the castle, Guinevere told him, ‘I am not angry with Meligrance
now. Let’s stay here tonight and we will go back to Camelot tomorrow morning.’
Sir Lancelot was very angry and Sir Meligrance knew it. ‘Sir Lancelot will kill me when
the Queen leaves this castle,’ he thought.
They ate in the castle’s great dining-room. When they finished dinner. Sir Meligrance
said to Lancelot, ‘I will take you to your room and you can sleep.’
He showed Lancelot into a room with a door in the floor. Sir Lancelot put his foot on the
door and it opened. He fell into a little room below the door and he could not climb up
again.
Sir Meligrance went to the Queen.
‘Sir Lancelot did not want to stay here. He went back to Camelot,’ he told her.

The next day Queen Guinevere went back to Camelot with Sir Meligrance. When they
arrived, they saw King Arthur.
‘Your knights are saying that Sir Meligrance took you away to his castle,’ said King
Arthur.
‘Yes,’ Queen Guinevere told King Arthur. ‘Meligrance took me to his castle and my
knights fought for me. But Meligrance had a lot of men and they were too strong for us. But
he is sorry, so I am not angry with him now.’
‘Tell me, Sir Meligrance,’ Arthur asked. ‘Are the Queens knights right? What happened
when you met Queen Guinevere in the wood with her knights and ladies?’
Sir Meligrance answered, ‘I did not take the Queen away. King Arthur. She came withme because she loves me.’
The King was very angry with Sir Meligrance.

A girl in Sir Meligrance’s castle carried food to Sir Lancelot every day. She liked him,
because he was strong and brave. So when Sir Meligrance took Guinevere to Camelot,
the girl opened the door in the floor. Sir Lancelot left the room and went quickly back to
King Arthur’s castle.
The King was with the Queen and his knights in the great dining-room when Sir
Lancelot came in. He saw Sir Meligrance there and was angry. He looked at Sir
Meligrance.
‘You took away Queen Guinevere to your castle,’ cried Sir Lancelot. ‘She is not angry
with you now, so I will not kill you for that. But now you say that she loves you. For this I
will kill you! I am the strongest of King Arthur’s knights, so I will fight you without a helmet.
But I will win!’
Sir Meligrance quickly moved closer to Sir Lancelot. He hit the other knight’s head with
his sword because he had no helmet. But Lancelot jumped away and cut Sir Meligrance’s
helmet in two. And Sir Meligrance fell to the ground - dead.
Chapter  
Sir Tristram
One day the King of Lyonesse went into the woods because he wanted to catch animals.
He made a long journey and at the end of the day he could not find the road home. His
queen waited in their castle, but he did not come back.
‘Where is the King?’ she thought. ‘He knows that I am going to have a child.’
So the Queen went out into the woods and looked for the King. She walked a long way
and began to feel very tired. In the evening she slept under a tree. There her baby boy
was born.
‘I am going to die,’ she thought. ‘I am very ill.’ She took the baby in her arms.
‘Oh, my little son,’ cried the Queen. ‘I will give you the name Tristram. It means "sad",
and I am sad. I know I am not going to live. But you, my dear child, will be a brave knight
when you are a man.’
The King found a way back to his castle, but the Queen was not there. His men went
into the woods and looked for her.
They found the Queen and the child under a tree and took them back to the castle. The
Queen told the King the baby’s name — and then she died.
For many days the King did not speak or eat. ‘He will die too,’ people said, ’and the little
boy Tristram will be our king.’ But after a long time the King began to enjoy life again.
Seven years later the King of Lyonesse married again, and the new queen had a son. She
loved her son very much, but she did not like Tristram, the son of her husband’s first wife.
One day the Queen thought of a plan. She made a drink for Tristram and put some
poison in it.
‘He will think it is wine,’ she thought. ‘But when he drinks it, he will die.’ She put the
glass on the table, ready for Tristram. ‘Everything is ready,’ she thought. ‘Good!’
But the Queen’s son came into the room before Tristram. He was very thirsty and he
drank from the glass. Then he fell on the floor and died.
The Queen tried to kill Tristram a second time. Again she put some poison into his
drink. She put the glass on the table and again waited for Tristram. This time the King
came into the room. He put his hand out to the glass of wine, but the Queen cried, ‘Do not
drink it!’
The King suddenly remembered his second son. There was poison in his drink! Then
he understood the Queen’s evil plan.
‘You wanted to kill Tristram, but your son drank the poison! So you tried to kill Tristram
again, but I nearly drank it!’ The King was very angry. ‘Make a fire! Take the Queen and
put her in it!’ he shouted to his men.
But when the fire was ready, Tristram came to his father. He fell down at his father’s
feet.
‘Father, do not do this! Take your wife back. Love her, and she will love you. She hates
me - so send me away. Then you will be happy again.’
So Tristram went to live with his father’s brother, Mark. Mark was King of Cornwall. He
loved Tristram and Tristram loved his uncle. He was happy there. When he arrived there,
Tristram was a boy. Some years later, he was a strong, brave man.

The King of Ireland also had a son. Sir Marhaus. Nobody could fight him and win. One
day, Sir Marhaus came across the sea to King Mark’s castle.
‘I am the best and strongest knight in Ireland! Send a knight to me and I will fight him.
Then you will see!’
Not one of King Mark’s knights wanted to fight Sir Marhaus.
Then Tristram went to his uncle and said, ‘I am not a boy now - I am a man. Make me a
knight and send me. I can fight Sir Marhaus and win.’
King Mark thought for a long time. ‘I do not want to send you, but the other knights will
not fight him,’ he said.
So the King made his brother’s son, Tristram, a knight and Tristram got ready for the
fight.
Many people came and watched the two men. They fought with their swords all day. SirMarhaus was strong, but he was older than Sir Tristram. He was not as quick on his feet.
He could not hit Tristram.
The sun was hot, and Sir Marhaus started to feel tired. Tristram’s sword cut through Sir
Marhaus’s helmet and killed him. His men took the dead man away to his ship.
Sir Marhaus also wounded Tristram badly in the fight, and the young man was very ill.
There was poison in the wound.
Nobody could make Sir Tristram’s wound better. After some time, an old woman came
and looked at it.
She said, ‘Ah! The poison in this wound came from Ireland. Send your knight there and
somebody will make him better.’

So King Mark sent Sir Tristram in a ship to Ireland. Sir Tristram used another name
because he killed the son of the King of Ireland.
On the ship Sir Tristram looked out at the green sea water. Birds flew in the sky. He
took his harp and began to play a song. He played the harp very beautifully. When his ship
came near Ireland, the King heard the sound of the music. He asked Tristram to his castle,
because he wanted his daughter to play the harp.
‘Where did you get that wound?’ the King of Ireland asked.
‘Some bad men fought me on my journey,’ said Tristram. He could not tell the King
about his fight with Sir Marhaus.
‘I will ask my daughter, Isolt, to make your wound better. Then will you teach her to play
the harp?’
‘Yes, Sir,’ said Tristram.
The King told his daughter about his idea.
‘I will be a good student. Father,’ said Isolt.
She carefully cleaned the wound and stayed near Tristram’s bed for many days and
nights. Then, when he was well again, Tristram taught Isolt the harp. She enjoyed playing
it and learned well. They were very happy. Tristram liked Isolt very much and she liked him
too.

Isolt knew another knight. His name was Sir Palamides. He loved Isolt and wanted to
marry her. He asked her again and again. She did not like him, but he did not listen to her.
One day there was a big fight between the great men and knights in the country. A lot
of people watched these fights. The knights were on the horses, with swords in their
hands.
Sir Palamides wanted to fight. He had a black helmet and black clothes, and he sat on
a black horse. Tristram had a white helmet, white clothes and a white horse. The twoknights began to fight. Sir Tristram moved quickly and hit Sir Palamides with his sword.
The black knight fell off his horse onto the ground. Then Tristram stood over him with his
sword.
‘Leave here! Do not speak to Isolt again - or I will kill you!’ he cried.

After the fight, Sir Tristram went back to Cornwall. He told his uncle about Isolt.
‘So Isolt is beautiful and kind? I can marry Isolt, and then the King of Ireland and I will
be friends. It will be good for our two countries,’ King Mark said. ‘Ask the King of Ireland for
me.’
So Tristram went back to Ireland.
‘King Mark wants to marry. Will you give him your lovely daughter, Isolt? He is a good
man and he will love her,’ Tristram said to the King of Ireland.
‘Yes, it will be a good thing for this country and for Cornwall,’ answered the King of
Ireland. And he sent Isolt to King Mark.
Tristram took Isolt on his ship. He played beautiful songs on his harp for her. Tristram
loved Isolt and she loved him.
‘I cannot marry you because you are going to marry King Mark. But he is a good man
and he will love you well,’ said Tristram. After many days at sea, the ship came to
Cornwall.
‘I have to leave you now, dear Isolt,’ Tristram said sadly. ‘I am going away to Camelot. I
want to be a Knight of the Round Table. I will fight for King Arthur. But please remember
this - I am your friend and I will always love you. When you want my help, I will come.’
The boy arrived at Camelot and saw Sir Lancelot. Sir Lancelot was the strongest of King
Arthur’s knights. When he heard the story, Lancelot quickly put his helmet on his head and
took his sword.
‘I will go now to Sir Meligrance’s castle and find the Queen,’ said Sir Lancelot to theboy. ‘Go and tell the King.’
When Lancelot came near the castle, he thought, ‘Sir Meligrance’s men will wait next to
the road. They will come out when I go past. So I will not take the road - I will go through
the wood.’
Lancelot was right. Sir Meligrance’s men waited by the road, but they did not see the
knight.
Sir Meligrance saw Lancelot outside the castle. His men were by the road, and
suddenly he was afraid. Lancelot was brave and strong. He could fight Sir Meligrance and
win.
So Sir Meligrance went to Queen Guinevere and said, ‘Oh, my Queen, I am sorry!
Please say you are not angry with me. I will take you back to Camelot and I will fight for
King Arthur. I want to be a good knight.’
The Queen did not know about Lancelot and Sir Meligrance’s men so she answered,
‘Yes, you are sorry. I can see that. I will not be angry with you.’

When Lancelot arrived at the castle, Guinevere told him, ‘I am not angry with Meligrance
now. Let’s stay here tonight and we will go back to Camelot tomorrow morning.’
Sir Lancelot was very angry and Sir Meligrance knew it. ‘Sir Lancelot will kill me when
the Queen leaves this castle,’ he thought.
They ate in the castle’s great dining-room. When they finished dinner. Sir Meligrance
said to Lancelot, ‘I will take you to your room and you can sleep.’
He showed Lancelot into a room with a door in the floor. Sir Lancelot put his foot on the
door and it opened. He fell into a little room below the door and he could not climb up
again.
Sir Meligrance went to the Queen.
‘Sir Lancelot did not want to stay here. He went back to Camelot,’ he told her.

The next day Queen Guinevere went back to Camelot with Sir Meligrance. When they
arrived, they saw King Arthur.
‘Your knights are saying that Sir Meligrance took you away to his castle,’ said King
Arthur.
‘Yes,’ Queen Guinevere told King Arthur. ‘Meligrance took me to his castle and my
knights fought for me. But Meligrance had a lot of men and they were too strong for us. But
he is sorry, so I am not angry with him now.’
‘Tell me, Sir Meligrance,’ Arthur asked. ‘Are the Queens knights right? What happened
when you met Queen Guinevere in the wood with her knights and ladies?’
Sir Meligrance answered, ‘I did not take the Queen away. King Arthur. She came withme because she loves me.’
The King was very angry with Sir Meligrance.

A girl in Sir Meligrance’s castle carried food to Sir Lancelot every day. She liked him,
because he was strong and brave. So when Sir Meligrance took Guinevere to Camelot,
the girl opened the door in the floor. Sir Lancelot left the room and went quickly back to
King Arthur’s castle.
The King was with the Queen and his knights in the great dining-room when Sir
Lancelot came in. He saw Sir Meligrance there and was angry. He looked at Sir
Meligrance.
‘You took away Queen Guinevere to your castle,’ cried Sir Lancelot. ‘She is not angry
with you now, so I will not kill you for that. But now you say that she loves you. For this I
will kill you! I am the strongest of King Arthur’s knights, so I will fight you without a helmet.
But I will win!’
Sir Meligrance quickly moved closer to Sir Lancelot. He hit the other knight’s head with
his sword because he had no helmet. But Lancelot jumped away and cut Sir Meligrance’s
helmet in two. And Sir Meligrance fell to the ground - dead.
Chapter  
Sir Tristram
One day the King of Lyonesse went into the woods because he wanted to catch animals.
He made a long journey and at the end of the day he could not find the road home. His
queen waited in their castle, but he did not come back.
‘Where is the King?’ she thought. ‘He knows that I am going to have a child.’
So the Queen went out into the woods and looked for the King. She walked a long way
and began to feel very tired. In the evening she slept under a tree. There her baby boy
was born.
‘I am going to die,’ she thought. ‘I am very ill.’ She took the baby in her arms.
‘Oh, my little son,’ cried the Queen. ‘I will give you the name Tristram. It means "sad",
and I am sad. I know I am not going to live. But you, my dear child, will be a brave knight
when you are a man.’
The King found a way back to his castle, but the Queen was not there. His men went
into the woods and looked for her.
They found the Queen and the child under a tree and took them back to the castle. The
Queen told the King the baby’s name — and then she died.
For many days the King did not speak or eat. ‘He will die too,’ people said, ’and the little
boy Tristram will be our king.’ But after a long time the King began to enjoy life again.
Seven years later the King of Lyonesse married again, and the new queen had a son. She
loved her son very much, but she did not like Tristram, the son of her husband’s first wife.
One day the Queen thought of a plan. She made a drink for Tristram and put some
poison in it.
‘He will think it is wine,’ she thought. ‘But when he drinks it, he will die.’ She put the
glass on the table, ready for Tristram. ‘Everything is ready,’ she thought. ‘Good!’
But the Queen’s son came into the room before Tristram. He was very thirsty and he
drank from the glass. Then he fell on the floor and died.
The Queen tried to kill Tristram a second time. Again she put some poison into his
drink. She put the glass on the table and again waited for Tristram. This time the King
came into the room. He put his hand out to the glass of wine, but the Queen cried, ‘Do not
drink it!’
The King suddenly remembered his second son. There was poison in his drink! Then
he understood the Queen’s evil plan.
‘You wanted to kill Tristram, but your son drank the poison! So you tried to kill Tristram
again, but I nearly drank it!’ The King was very angry. ‘Make a fire! Take the Queen and
put her in it!’ he shouted to his men.
But when the fire was ready, Tristram came to his father. He fell down at his father’s
feet.
‘Father, do not do this! Take your wife back. Love her, and she will love you. She hates
me - so send me away. Then you will be happy again.’
So Tristram went to live with his father’s brother, Mark. Mark was King of Cornwall. He
loved Tristram and Tristram loved his uncle. He was happy there. When he arrived there,
Tristram was a boy. Some years later, he was a strong, brave man.

The King of Ireland also had a son. Sir Marhaus. Nobody could fight him and win. One
day, Sir Marhaus came across the sea to King Mark’s castle.
‘I am the best and strongest knight in Ireland! Send a knight to me and I will fight him.
Then you will see!’
Not one of King Mark’s knights wanted to fight Sir Marhaus.
Then Tristram went to his uncle and said, ‘I am not a boy now - I am a man. Make me a
knight and send me. I can fight Sir Marhaus and win.’
King Mark thought for a long time. ‘I do not want to send you, but the other knights will
not fight him,’ he said.
So the King made his brother’s son, Tristram, a knight and Tristram got ready for the
fight.
Many people came and watched the two men. They fought with their swords all day. SirMarhaus was strong, but he was older than Sir Tristram. He was not as quick on his feet.
He could not hit Tristram.
The sun was hot, and Sir Marhaus started to feel tired. Tristram’s sword cut through Sir
Marhaus’s helmet and killed him. His men took the dead man away to his ship.
Sir Marhaus also wounded Tristram badly in the fight, and the young man was very ill.
There was poison in the wound.
Nobody could make Sir Tristram’s wound better. After some time, an old woman came
and looked at it.
She said, ‘Ah! The poison in this wound came from Ireland. Send your knight there and
somebody will make him better.’

So King Mark sent Sir Tristram in a ship to Ireland. Sir Tristram used another name
because he killed the son of the King of Ireland.
On the ship Sir Tristram looked out at the green sea water. Birds flew in the sky. He
took his harp and began to play a song. He played the harp very beautifully. When his ship
came near Ireland, the King heard the sound of the music. He asked Tristram to his castle,
because he wanted his daughter to play the harp.
‘Where did you get that wound?’ the King of Ireland asked.
‘Some bad men fought me on my journey,’ said Tristram. He could not tell the King
about his fight with Sir Marhaus.
‘I will ask my daughter, Isolt, to make your wound better. Then will you teach her to play
the harp?’
‘Yes, Sir,’ said Tristram.
The King told his daughter about his idea.
‘I will be a good student. Father,’ said Isolt.
She carefully cleaned the wound and stayed near Tristram’s bed for many days and
nights. Then, when he was well again, Tristram taught Isolt the harp. She enjoyed playing
it and learned well. They were very happy. Tristram liked Isolt very much and she liked him
too.

Isolt knew another knight. His name was Sir Palamides. He loved Isolt and wanted to
marry her. He asked her again and again. She did not like him, but he did not listen to her.
One day there was a big fight between the great men and knights in the country. A lot
of people watched these fights. The knights were on the horses, with swords in their
hands.
Sir Palamides wanted to fight. He had a black helmet and black clothes, and he sat on
a black horse. Tristram had a white helmet, white clothes and a white horse. The twoknights began to fight. Sir Tristram moved quickly and hit Sir Palamides with his sword.
The black knight fell off his horse onto the ground. Then Tristram stood over him with his
sword.
‘Leave here! Do not speak to Isolt again - or I will kill you!’ he cried.

After the fight, Sir Tristram went back to Cornwall. He told his uncle about Isolt.
‘So Isolt is beautiful and kind? I can marry Isolt, and then the King of Ireland and I will
be friends. It will be good for our two countries,’ King Mark said. ‘Ask the King of Ireland for
me.’
So Tristram went back to Ireland.
‘King Mark wants to marry. Will you give him your lovely daughter, Isolt? He is a good
man and he will love her,’ Tristram said to the King of Ireland.
‘Yes, it will be a good thing for this country and for Cornwall,’ answered the King of
Ireland. And he sent Isolt to King Mark.
Tristram took Isolt on his ship. He played beautiful songs on his harp for her. Tristram
loved Isolt and she loved him.
‘I cannot marry you because you are going to marry King Mark. But he is a good man
and he will love you well,’ said Tristra
So Isolt married King Mark, and he gave her many lovely things. But one day Sir
Palamides suddenly arrived and carried Isolt away on his horse.
Another knight went after him, and Sir Palamides fought him. Isolt ran away. She ran
and ran through the wood.
‘Night is coming,’ thought Isolt. ‘Nobody will find me here in the dark wood.’ She sat
down and cried. Then she saw a lake.
‘I will jump into the water and die! Then that evil Sir Palamides cannot hurt me or take
me away.’
Isolt stood by the lake and looked into the cold water.
She heard the sound of a horse and turned round. It was not Sir Palamides. It was
another knight.
‘Who are you?’ asked Isolt. She was afraid.
‘I am Sir Atherp,’ answered the knight. ‘Why are you here in the wood at night. Queen
Isolt? Do not be afraid. I will not hurt you. I hope I can help you.’‘I ran away from Sir Palamides. He wants to take me away! Oh, please help me!’
‘It is dangerous for you here,’ Sir Atherp said. ‘Come with me to my castle.’
Later that night, Sir Palamides arrived at the castle of Sir Atherp.
‘Open the doors!’ he shouted, but nobody answered.

Sir Tristram was on his way to Camelot when a man ran to him.
‘Sir Palamides took Isolt away,’ he said.
Tristram was very angry. He went back to Cornwall quickly and looked for Isolt. He saw
a knight on the ground in a wood.
‘Sir Palamides wounded me in a fight,’ said the man. Tristram gave the brave knight a
drink of water.
‘Where did Isolt go?’ Sir Tristram asked the knight.
‘I do not know,’ answered the knight. ‘She ran away when she saw the fight.’
‘I have to find her,’ said Sir Tristram, and he jumped back on his horse. He came to a
lake and looked at the ground.
‘Isolt was here,’ he thought. ‘And another person on a horse. I will follow them!’
After a short time he came to a castle. Outside the castle was Sir Palamides.
Sir Palamides saw Sir Tristram and fought him. But Sir Tristram was stronger. Tristram
threw Palamides off his horse and the evil knight fell onto the ground. Sir Palamides stood
up and pulled his sword out of its scabbard. Then Tristram got off his horse and took out
his sword. The two men fought there in front of the castle.
Isolt was inside the castle. She heard the noise of the fight, and looked down from her
window.
‘Tristram is here!’ she cried. ‘He will help me!’
She watched the fight. Palamides fell again and Tristram stood over him with his sword.
‘No,’ shouted Isolt loudly. ‘Do not kill him!‘ Sir Atherp’s men opened the castle doors
and Isolt ran outside. ‘Please do not kill him, kind Sir Tristram. He fought bravely. Send
him to King Arthur and he will learn to be a good knight. Then he can fight for the King.
‘I will do this for you,’ answered Tristram.
So Sir Palamides went to Camelot and learned to be a very good knight.

Sir Tristram took Isolt to King Mark, and he stayed in Cornwall with them. But the King
began to be afraid of him.
‘Sir Tristram is young and brave,’ he thought. ‘He fought Sir Palamides for my queen,
Isolt. Perhaps now she will love Tristram, and will not love me.’
One day Tristram went with Isolt to the beach. King Mark followed them there and
watched them. Tristram played a beautiful song for Isolt on his harp. She listened with asmile on her face.
Suddenly King Mark came with his sword.
‘Why are you singing love songs to my wife?’ he shouted. ‘I am going to kill you for this!’
Tristram had no sword and could not stop King Mark. The King wounded Tristram very
badly and he fell at Isolt’s feet and died.
Day after day, Isolt sat and looked at the sea. She did not eat or drink. She did not
speak to anybody again. She cried because Tristram was dead. Then she died too.

When King Arthur heard the story of Tristram and Isolt, he was very sorry. Tristram was a
brave Knight of the Round Table. Arthur was very angry with King Mark, so he sent
another knight to Cornwall. That knight killed him.
Chapter  
The Grail
King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table were in Camelot. One day an old man with
white hair and in white clothes came to the King.
‘My King, I am bringing you a young knight. He is the son of a great man and he will do
great things.’
The King saw a young man. He wore red clothes and a red helmet and his face was
very beautiful.
For a long time there was one place at the Round Table without a knight at it. Years
before, Merlin said, ‘Only a good knight, your best knight, will sit there. The place is for
your best knight, and he will come to it.’
This was the only place with no name on it. The old man took the young knight to that
place at the Round Table. There was a name there for the first time. It said, in gold letters:
SIR GALAHAD.
‘Sit here,’ said the old man. Then he left King Arthur and the Knights of the Round
Table and nobody saw him again.
‘Who is this young man? Why is he sitting there? Why is he not afraid?’ asked the King.
‘Does anybody know him?’
‘I know him,’ said Sir Lancelot. ‘When I was on a journey, a nun came outside with this
young man. She brought him to me and said, “His name is Galahad. He has to be a
knight. It is very important.” Then she took him inside again.’
The other knights looked at Galahad and they looked at Sir Lancelot. Their two faces
were nearly the same.
‘Sir Lancelot married when he was very young,’ remembered one of the knights. ‘This is
Sir Lancelots son.’Sir Lancelot smiled at his son but said nothing.
King Arthur made Galahad a knight and they all sat down at the Round Table.
Suddenly they heard a loud noise. Then there was a great white light.
They looked up and saw a gold cup above the table. What was it? Where did it come
from? And then suddenly it was not there!
Nobody spoke. Then Sir Galahad said, ’That is the Grail,* and it is in this country! I will
go out and look for it. I will come back when I find it.’
‘We will go with you,’ said Sir Lancelot, Sir Cors and Sir Percivale.
King Arthur was very sad. He looked round the Round Table at his knights. Then he
spoke to them.
‘We were brothers, but this will be the end of our Round Table. You are leaving and I
will not see you again.’
The four knights got on their horses and left Camelot. For many years they looked for
the Grail but they found nothing.
Other knights also left and looked for the Grail. Nobody found it and some knights never
came back to Camelot. The Round Table was different now, and King Arthur was very
sad.

After many years Sir Galahad, Sir Percivale and Sir Bors came to a place near the sea.
They looked down and saw a ship. It was evening, but white light shone from the ship.
‘I know that we are going to find the Grail,’ said Sir Galahad.
They went down to the sea and onto the ship. There, on a table, was the Grail. They
were all very excited.
‘Look!‘ cried Sir Galahad. ‘Here is the Grail! Now we can end our journey.’
The knights were all very tired and they fell asleep. The ship went out to sea. The next
morning, when the knights woke up, they were near a great city.
‘We have to take the Grail into the city,’ said Sir Galahad. So they took the Grail and left
the ship.

There was no king in that country, because the dead king had no son. The great men sat
in the castle and thought about the problem.
When King Arthur’s knights arrived at the castle with the Grail, everybody was excited.
Then an old man came into the castle. He had white clothes and white hair. The knights
knew him when they saw him.
‘These three knights are here at the end of a long journey,’ said the old man, ‘and they
have the Grail. Take the youngest knight, a very brave man, and make him your king.’
* The Grail: A gold cup. Jesus used it before he died.Then the old man left. Nobody saw him come and nobody saw him go. So Sir Galahad
was now the new king.
‘I found the Grail and I am happy now,’ Sir Galahad said. He built a beautiful church
and put the Grail in it.
Then the old man came to him again.
‘Your work is done. Now you are going to die,’ he said.
Sir Galahad was not afraid. In the morning they found him dead in front of the Grail.
And his face was very happy.

Sir Bors went back to Camelot.
‘We found the Grail and do not have to look for it now,’ he told King Arthur.
Many other knights also came back and sat at the Round Table again. King Arthur was
happy — but he was also sad.
‘I know that the end of the Round Table is coming. Many brave knights are dead. And
no new knights will come and take their places,’ King Arthur said sadly.
Chapter  
King Arthur Dies
One day, King Arthur and Sir Gawain, one of his best knights, went to France. Sir Lancelot
was in France at the time, and King Arthur was angry with him. He wanted to fight him
there.
When Arthur was away, the evil knight Sir Mordred came to Camelot. He wanted to
take Queen Guinevere away.
‘King Arthur is dead!’ he told the Queen. ‘He died in France in a fight. I am now king,
and you will be my queen.’
‘I will die first!’ cried the Queen.
Guinevere ran away to a castle in London, and her knights went with her. Mordred
came to London with his men. But the walls of the castle were very strong, and he could
not get inside.
Then one of Mordreds men came to him and said, ‘King Arthur is coming back to
England with his men and a lot of ships.’
Mordred went to Dover with his men and waited for King Arthur. There was a great
fight, but Sir Mordred’s men could not win. They ran away.
But one of Sir Mordred’s men wounded Sir Gawain, and King Arthur found the brave
knight on the ground.
‘I am dying. Give me a pen and paper. I want to write to Sir Lancelot.’He wrote:
To Lancelot,
I know that I am dying. You are my brother and I love you. Please come and
help King Arthur in his fight with evil Sir Mordred. No knight is braver than you.
Goodbye, my friend!
Gawain
And then he died. King Arthur was very sad because he loved Gawain very much. He
sat on the ground next to the dead knight and cried all night.

Sir Mordred found more men and they waited for Arthur at a place near a lake. King Arthur
knew the place - Excalibur came from the same lake.
On the night before the fight, Arthur saw Sir Gawain in his sleep. Gawain spoke to him.
‘Do not fight Mordred now. In one month Lancelot will come with his men. He will help
you and then the Queen can go back to Camelot.’
The King called his knights and told them about Sir Gawain.
‘We will not fight today. I will go and speak with Mordred. Come with me and bring your
swords. But leave them in their scabbards. Take them out only when Mordred or his
knights take out theirs. Then kill them!’
King Arthur sent a man to Mordred. The man told him about Arthur’s plan. There was
no fight that day. Then Arthur met Mordred. The two men stood and talked. The King’s
knights stood near the King, and Mordred’s knights stood near Mordred.
Suddenly something jumped on the foot of one of Mordred’s knights. He pulled out his
sword and killed the animal.
The other knights saw his sword and took out their swords.
‘This is an unhappy day!‘ cried King Arthur and they began to fight.
They fought all day. When evening came, King Arthur saw only two of his knights. Sir
Lucan and Sir Bedivere. His other knights were dead. Arthur cried when he saw his brave
knights on the ground.
Mordred stood with his sword and looked at his dead men on the ground. Then Arthur
ran to Mordred and killed him. Mordred fell, but he wounded King Arthur with his sword.
Sir Lucan and Sir Bedivere took the King to a little church near the lake. But after they
arrived, Sir Lucan also died of his wounds.
The sky was dark and it was a cold night. Arthur felt very weak.
‘I am also going to die now. It is time. Please take my sword, Excalibur. Go to the lake
and throw it into the water,’ he told Sir Bedivere.
Sir Bedivere took the sword and walked to the lake. Then he looked at the beautiful
sword.‘Why do I have to throw this beautiful sword into the lake? That will not help King Arthur,’
he thought.
So he put Excalibur under a big stone, and went back to the King. He said, ‘I did it. I
threw your sword into the lake.’
‘What did you see there?‘ the King asked. He was very cold and his wounds hurt him.
‘I saw the water, the sky and the stones. That is all.’
‘Then you did not do the right thing. You did not throw the sword into the lake,’ King
Arthur said. ‘Go again, and throw Excalibur into the water. Then come to me again.’
Sir Bedivere went again to the lake and took the sword from under the stone. He looked
again at the beautiful sword and thought, ‘I cannot throw this sword into the water. I want
to have it. Then I will always remember King Arthur.’
So again he put the sword under a stone and again he went back to King Arthur.
‘I saw the water, the sky and the stones. Then the sword fell into the lake,’ he said.
‘Go again,’ the King said very sadly. ‘Go quickly, because I am dying.’
‘Oh my King! I am very sorry,’ said Bedivere. ‘I will do it now.’
He went back to the lake very quickly and got Excalibur. This time he threw it hard over
the water. An arm came up out of the water and caught the sword. Then the arm took it
down into the lake.
Sir Bedivere went back and told the King about the arm. ‘Now,’ said King Arthur, ‘take
me to the lake quickly.’
Sir Bedivere carried the King to the lake. There was a long black boat on the water and
some ladies in black dresses were in the boat. The Lady of the Lake and Queen Morgan le
Fay were two of the ladies.
He looked at their faces and thought, ‘I know these faces. I knew these ladies when
they lived. Now they are dead, but I remember them.’
‘Please put me on the boat now,’ said King Arthur. So Sir Bedivere put him on the boat
and the ladies stood round him.
‘I am leaving you now, and I want you to tell the story of King Arthur and the Knights of
the Round Table. I will come again one day when my country asks for me,’ called King
Arthur to Sir Bedivere from the boat.
Those were the King’s last words. The boat went out across the water. Sir Bedivere
stood and cried.
And that is the end of the story of King Arthur and his brave Knights of the Round
Table.
The spring came, and there were flowers and little birds all over the country. But in the
garden of the selfish giant, it was still winter. The birds did not sing in it because there
were no children. The trees forgot to grow flowers. Snow covered the grass, and ice
covered the trees with silver.
Strange and wonderful things happen in the seven short stories in this book. The reader is
taken into a world of kings and queens, princes and princesses, giants and dwarfs, and
talking animals. Exciting and amusing, happy and sad, these are stories for people of all
ages.
The stories were written by the Irish writer Oscar Wilde. He was born in Dublin in     . His
father was a well-known doctor, and his mother wrote poems.
Oscar Wilde left Ireland when he was twenty. He went to Oxford University and
studied Latin and Greek. He was a very clever student, but he was also known for his way
of life. He loved beautiful things, and he filled his rooms with them. He wore beautiful and
unusual clothes and amused people with his clever talk.
In     , Wilde married a rich Irish woman called Constance Lloyd. They had two sons
and Wilde wrote a book of stories for the boys. The book was called The Happy Prince
and Other Tales (    ). Three of the stories in this book are taken from there. The other
four stories come from a second book for his children, A House of Pomegranates (    ).
By     , Wilde was a very successful writer. Crowds of people went to the theatre to
see his plays. Then suddenly his life changed. Wilde had a very close friend, a young man
named Alfred Douglas. Douglas’s father was not happy about Wilde’s interest in his son,
and the two men began a terrible fight in the law courts. Wilde lost this fight, and went to
prison for two years. Life in the prison was very difficult, and Wilde’s health suffered.
When he left prison, he went to live in France. He changed his name to Sebastian
Melmoth, a name that he took from a person in a book. He was now poor, and his health
did not get better. He died in Paris in     .
Oscar Wilde wrote a number of different kinds of books. The Picture of Dorian Gray, a long
work of fiction for adults, came out in the same year as his second book of short stories.
This is the strange and clever story of a man who does not show his age. He stays young
and handsome for many years. At the same time, a picture of the man grows old and ugly.
Strange things happen when someone loves beauty and the pleasant things in life too
much.
Wilde’s best poem is The Ballad of Reading Gaol (    ). He wrote this in France, just
after he came out of prison. It is about the pain of prison life.
Wilde’s most important work is his writing for the theatre. Some of his best plays are
Lady Windermere’s Fan (    ), A Woman of No Importance (    ) and An Ideal Husband
(    ). These plays were popular when they were written. They are still popular today.
Wilde has a great gift for writing clever and amusing conversations. His most famous play
is probably The Importance of Being Earnest (    ). It looks at life in an unusual way.
Unimportant things are very serious, and important things are laughed at.
–   –Wilde loved his children very much, and he enjoyed telling them stories. Many of the
stories in this book show what a child’s life is like. Other stories are about adults – or
animals. Wilde is very good at showing people’s feelings. The people and animals in these
stories are often in danger or in love. They are suffering, or they are wonderfully happy,
and the reader understands their feelings. But this is a magical world, and anything can
happen.
–   –The Young King
The young king was alone in his beautiful room in the palace. He was only sixteen years
old and he was wild-eyed, like an animal of the forest. The old king’s servants found him in
the forest. At that time, the boy believed that he was the son of a poor forester. He was
brought up by the forester. But now he knew that he was the child of the old king’s
daughter.
The king’s daughter married an ordinary man, a painter. He painted pictures on the
walls of the great church where kings were crowned. But one day he disappeared, leaving
the pictures unfinished. The week-old baby was taken away from his mother’s side while
she slept. The forester and his wife had no children, and the baby was given to them.
The princess died.

When the old king was dying, he said, ‘My heart is heavy because I have done a terrible
thing. The crown must not pass away from my family. Bring my daughters child from the
forest. He will be king after me.’
When the boy was brought to the palace, he showed a strange love for beautiful
things. He gave a happy cry when he saw his fine new clothes and rich jewels. He quickly
took off the old coat that he wore in the forest. He walked through the palace from room to
room, looking at everything.
A rich man came to see the young king one day. He found him on his knees in front of
a beautiful picture from Venice. On another day, people searched for the king for hours.
They finally found him in a little room at the north end of the palace. He was looking at the
shape of the Greek god Adonis, cut in a jewel.
In bed that night, the young king thought about the beautiful clothes for his special day
— a gold coat and a jewelled crown. People were working day and night to finish the
clothes in time. The young king imagined himself in the great church, dressed as a king.
His eyes closed, and he fell asleep. As he slept, he dreamed.

He dreamed that he was standing in a long, low room. Around him were cloth-makers at
work. Only a little daylight came in through narrow windows. The men’s faces were pale
and thin. Little children were working with them. They were weak and hungry and their little
hands shook.
The young king went to watch one of the cloth-makers. The man looked at him angrily.
‘Why are you watching me?’ he said. ‘Did our employer ask you to watch us?’
‘Who is your employer?’ asked the young king.
‘He is a man like me. But unlike me, he wears fine clothes. And while I am hungry, he
has too much food.’
‘You are not a slave,’ said the young king. ‘Your employer does not own you.’
‘The rich make the poor their slaves,’ answered the cloth-maker. ‘We must work to
live. But they pay us too little and we die. Men call us free, but we are slaves. But these
things do not matter to you. You are not one of us: your face is too happy.’
–   ––   –He turned away and continued his work. Then the young king saw that the cloth-maker
was making gold cloth. He felt a sudden fear.
‘Who are you making that cloth for?’ he asked.
‘I am making it for the crowning of the young king.’
The young king woke up with a loud cry. He was in his own room in the palace.
Through the window, he saw the golden moon hanging in the sky.

The young king fell asleep again and dreamed. He dreamed that he was on a ship.
Hundreds of slaves were working on the ship. They were wearing only simple cloths round
their waists, and each man was tied to the man next to him. The hot sun shone down on
them without pity. A man ran up and down between the slaves. He hit them until the blood
came. ‘Work faster!’ he ordered.
At last the ship stopped near some land. The seamen took one of the youngest slaves,
tied a stone to his feet and let him down over the side of the ship. After some time they
pulled him out of the water. He had a pearl in his right hand. The seamen took it from him,
then pushed him back into the water.
The young slave came up again and again; each time he brought with him a beautiful
pearl. The seamen put the pearls in a green bag.
Then the slave came up for the last time. This time he brought the best pearl of all. It
was shaped like the full moon and it was brighter than the morning star. But the face of the
slave was strangely white. He fell down on the ship, and blood came from his ears and
mouth.
‘Dead?’ cried one of the seamen. ‘Throw the body into the sea.’ He looked at the pearl.
‘This will be for the crowning of the young king.’
When the young king heard this, he woke up with a great cry. Through the window, the
stars were growing weak and daylight was coming.

The young king fell asleep again and dreamed. He was walking through a dark forest full
of strange fruit and flowers. He continued walking until he came out of the forest. There he
saw a great crowd of men, working in a dry river. They were making large holes in the
ground and breaking the rocks with tools.
The young king turned and saw an old man standing behind him, with a mirror in his
hand.
‘Who are these men?’ he asked.
‘The people in the walled cities have no food, and little water,’ said the old man. ‘But
these men are working in the river to find-’
‘What are they trying to find?’
‘Jewels — for a king’s crown,’ said the old man.
‘For which king?’
‘Look in the mirror and you will see him.’
The young king looked in the mirror and saw his own face. He woke up with a great
cry. Bright sunlight was shining into the room, and in the garden outside birds were singing
in the trees.
–   –
Government officers came into the young king’s room and greeted him. Servants brought
the coat made of gold cloth. Other servants placed the crown and fine jewels in front of
him.
The young king looked at the lovely things. They were very beautiful. But he
remembered his dreams, and said, ‘Take them away. I will not wear them.’
The government officers were very surprised. Some of them thought that he was
joking. They laughed.
He spoke to them again: ‘Take these things away. I will not wear them. This cloth was
made by the white hands of pain. There is blood in the jewels and death in the heart of the
pearl.’ And he told them his three dreams.
When the men heard this, they said to him, ‘You do not know what you are saying. A
dream is only a dream — it is not real. We cannot worry about the people who work for us.
And if you do not wear these clothes and this crown, you will not look like a king. How will
the people know that you are king?’
‘Perhaps you are right,’ answered the young king. ‘But I will not wear this coat and I
will not wear this crown. I did not wear fine clothes when I came into the palace. I will go
out of the palace in the same way. Go, all of you. Only this boy may stay.’
The government officers and the servants left. Only one servant, a boy, stayed with
the king. The young king opened a big box and took out a rough coat. This was his coat in
the days when he watched animals on the hillside for the forester. The young king also
took out a stick from the forest.
The boy said, ‘Sir, where is your crown?’
The young king cut a piece from a wild rose that grew near the window. He made it
into a circle and put it on his head.
‘This will be my crown,’ he said.
The young king left his room. The government officers were waiting for him. He got up
on his horse and rode out through the great gates of the palace towards the church. The
boy ran with him.
The people in the streets laughed. ‘This is not the king,’ they said as he rode past
them. He stopped and answered, ‘I am the king.’ And he told them his three dreams.
A man came out of the crowd and spoke angrily to him: ‘The life of the poor comes
from the fine things that rich people use. When we make these things, we can buy bread.
Go back to your palace and put on your kings clothes. Why are you worrying about us?’
‘Aren’t rich people and poor people brothers?’ asked the young king. His eyes filled
with tears as he rode through the angry cries of the people. The boy became afraid and
left him.
At the great gate of the church, the soldiers tried to stop him. ‘Only the king can come
in here,’ they said to him.
‘I am the king,’ he answered angrily, and he pushed through them.
The most important priest in the church was waiting to crown the new king. He saw the
young king in his poor clothes, and he went to meet him.
‘My son,’ he said. ‘Is this how a king dresses? What crown shall I crown you with? This
should be a day of great happiness.’
‘Can happiness wear what sadness and pain have made?’ said the king, and he told
the High Priest his dreams.
–    –‘I am an old man,’ answered the High Priest. ‘I know that many wrong things are done
in the world. But God has made us this way, and He is wiser than you. The weight of this
world’s suffering is too heavy for one man.’
‘Can you say that in this house of God!’ said the young king. He walked past the High
Priest and went down on his knees.
Suddenly a loud noise came from the street outside. The government officers came
into the church, shouting, ‘Where is this dreamer of dreams? Where is the king who is
dressed as a servant? He cannot be our king!’
The young king stood up and turned sadly towards them. Then sunlight shone down
through the coloured glass of the church windows. It changed his coat into a coat that was
more beautiful than one of gold cloth. From the dead stick, white flowers grew that were
more beautiful than pearls. The wild roses on his head shone brighter than jewels.
He stood there dressed as a king. The light of God filled the place and there was
music and singing. The people fell on their knees.
The High Priest laid his hands on the young king’s head. Someone has crowned you
who is greater than me,’ he said, and he went down on his knees in front of his king.
–    –The Birthday of the Infanta
It was the birthday of the Infanta, the daughter of the King of Spain. She was twelve years
old. The little princess was playing with her friends in the sun-filled palace garden. From a
window in the palace, the king watched her. The Infanta looked just like her mother. The
king thought sadly about his young French queen. She died soon after her child was born,
before she saw the beautiful flowers in the garden and the fruit on the trees.
His love was great, and he could not hide her body in the ground. So an Egyptian
doctor worked on her body. It stayed as fresh after death as it was in life. Twelve years
later, it still lay in the small palace church. Once every month the king went there and fell
down on his knees by her side. He called out, ‘My queen! My queen!’
Today, the king watched the Infanta playing in the garden. Memories of his married life
returned to him. The Infanta had the same pretty ways as the queen. She moved her head
in the same way when she talked. She had the same proud, beautiful mouth, the same
wonderful smile. But the king felt very sad. He could not enjoy the children laughing or the
sunny garden. When the Infanta looked up again at the window, he was not there.
‘Why has he gone away,’ she said, ‘when I want him to stay with me on my birthday?
Where is he? Has he has gone to that dark little church where I cannot go? He is very silly!
The sun is shining so brightly and everyone is so happy!’
She walked to a big tent to watch her birthday show. Don Pedro, her uncle, went with
her. The Camarera went too. She was a great lady who looked after the Infanta. At the
show, some boys rode on wooden horses, dressed in bright clothes. An Indian man played
music on a pipe and made magic. He covered the sand with a cloth, and a tree grew up
out of it. Then flowers grew on the tree. He brought eggs out of his nose. Then he took
one egg and changed it into a little bird. The bird flew away, and the children were excited
and happy.
Some schoolboys did a beautiful dance. Then some Africans sat in a ring and played
music. Another man brought in a dog. The animal stood up on its back legs and danced.
But the funniest thing was the dancing of an ugly little dwarf. He had very short legs
and a very big head. The children laughed and laughed at him. The Camarera told the
Infanta to be quieter. A princess must not laugh so loudly.
The dwarf was found by two rich Spanish men when he was running wild in the forest.
His father happily sold his ugly child to them, and they took him to the palace as a surprise
for the Infanta. There was one very funny thing about the dwarf. He did not seem to know
how strange and ugly he looked. He seemed quite happy! When the children laughed, he
laughed too.
The Infanta was very amused by him. He could not keep his eyes off her; he seemed
to dance just for her. At the end of his dance, she took a white rose out of her hair and
threw it to him. He caught the flower and kissed it. Then he put his hand on his heart and
went down on one knee in front of her. He was smiling, and his little eyes were bright.
The Infanta laughed at this for a long time. She wanted the dwarf to dance again. But
the Camarera said, ‘The sun is too hot. The Infanta should go back to the palace for her
birthday dinner. The dwarf can dance again for you later.’ So the Infanta went back to the
palace, and the other children followed her.
–    ––    –
The little dwarf was very, very proud. He ran out into the garden, kissed the white rose and
jumped up and down happily. He told the flowers: ‘The Infanta has given me this beautiful
white rose. She wants me to dance for her a second time.’ They moved their heads, but
they did not seem to hear him. He told the birds, but did not stop singing. Perhaps their
song was about him and lnfanta.
‘The Infanta has given me a white rose and she loves me. Oh, I want to be with her in
the palace. I can be her friend and play with her and teach her nice things. I can make a
pipe and play music on it for her. I can teach her how to call the birds. Yes! She must
come to the forest and play with me. We will dance on the fresh grass. When she is tired, I
will find a soft bank of flowers for her. Then she can rest on it.’
He looked at the palace. The doors and windows were shut to keep out the midday
heat. Then he saw a little door which was open. He went through it. He was in a beautiful
room. There was gold everywhere, and the floor was made of coloured stones. But the
little Infanta was not there.
The dwarf came to a second room. In the centre there was a big round table with red
books on it. This was the room where the government officers met. The little dwarf was
afraid, but he thought of the pretty Infanta. ‘I must continue,’ he said, ‘and find her. I will tell
her that I love her. I will ask her to come away with me after my dance. I know that she will
come to the forest with me.’ He smiled as he thought of it.
He went into the next room. This was the brightest and the most beautiful of all the
rooms. The tables and chairs were made of silver, and the floor was of sea-green stone.
But he was not alone!
He saw someone — a small person — standing in the shadow at the other end of the
room. Watching him! He shouted with excitement, and moved out into the sunlight. As he
moved, the other one moved too. He saw it clearly. This was not the Infanta! It was a
terrible, ugly thing. It was not shaped like other people. It had short legs and long arms,
and its big head was covered with long black hair. He looked angrily at it, and it looked
angrily back at him. He laughed, and it laughed. He went towards it, and it came to meet
him.
‘What is it?’ He looked at the rest of the room. He could see everything in this wall of
clear water. Every picture, every chair, every table. He took the white rose and kissed it.
That other one had a rose too! It kissed it and pressed it to its heart. He was looking at
himself in a mirror!
When he realized this, he fell down on the floor. He cried. He was the ugly one! The
children laughed at him, not with him. The little Infanta did not love him; she only laughed
at his ugliness.
‘Why didn’t they leave me in the forest? There were no mirrors there and I never knew.
Why didn’t my father kill me? Why did he sell me so other people could laugh at me?’
Hot tears poured down his face. He pulled the white rose to pieces and threw the
pieces away. The other one did the same. When he looked at it, it looked at him with a
face full of pain. He covered his eyes and lay in the shadow.

When the Infanta and her friends came into the room, they saw the ugly little dwarf. He
was lying on the floor and hitting it with his hands in the strangest way. They shouted
happily and stood round and watched.
‘His dancing was very funny,’ said the Infanta, ‘but this is funnier.’
–    –The little dwarf did not look up. He lay there, crying very quietly. Then he made a
strange noise and put his hand on his side. Then he fell back and lay there.
‘That was wonderful!’ said the Infanta. ‘But now you must dance for me.’
‘Yes,’ cried the children. ‘Get up and dance!’ But the little dwarf did not answer.
The Infanta was angry and called her uncle. He was walking with the king’s doctor in
the garden outside.
‘My funny little dwarf is not listening to me,’ she cried. ‘You must wake him up. Tell him
to dance for me!’
Don Pedro hit the dwarf. ‘You must dance,’ he said. ‘The Infanta of Spain wants to see
you dance.’
But the little dwarf did not move. The king’s doctor looked at the dwarf and put his
hand on the little man’s heart. ‘Oh, princess,’ he said, ’your funny little dwarf will never
dance again. That is very sad, because he is very, very ugly. Even the king laughed at
him.’
‘Why won’t he dance again?’ asked the Infanta.
‘Because his heart is broken. He did not want to live, and he is dead.’
The Infanta was angry. ‘In future,’ she cried, ‘I will only play with people who have no
hearts.’ And she ran out into the garden.
–    –The Happy Prince
The statue of the Happy Prince stood high above the city. It was covered with gold, its
eyes were bright blue jewels, and a red jewel hung from its waist. Everyone thought that it
was very beautiful.
‘Why aren’t you like the Happy Prince?’ mothers said to their little boys when they
cried.
Sad men looked at the statue and said, ‘I am glad that someone in the world is happy.’
One night a little bird flew alone over the city. The other birds were all in Egypt now.
‘Where can I stay tonight?’ he thought. Then he saw the statue. ‘I will stay there,’ he
thought. ‘It is high up, so there is plenty of fresh air.’
He landed between the feet of the Happy Prince. ‘I have a golden bedroom!’ he
thought. But as he put his head under his wing, a large drop of water fell on him.
He looked up. ‘That is very strange!’ he thought. ‘There is not a cloud in the sky, but it
is raining!’
Then another drop fell. ‘I cannot stay on a statue that does not keep me dry,’ he
thought. ‘I must find another place.’ And he decided to fly away. But as he opened his
wings, a third drop fell. He looked up and saw — Ah! What did he see?
The eyes of the Happy Prince were full of tears. Tears ran down his golden face. The
face was very beautiful in the moonlight, and the bird felt sorry for him. ‘Who are you?’
asked the bird. ‘I am the Happy Prince.’
‘Then why are you crying? I am wet with your tears.’
‘When I was alive,’ said the prince, ‘I had a heart like every other man. But I did not
know what tears were. I lived in a palace where there was no sadness. In the daytime I
played with my friends in a beautiful garden, and in the evening I danced. There was a
high wall round the garden. But I did not know what lay on the other side. So I was called
the Happy Prince. I was pleased with my little world. Now I am dead, and they have put
me up here. I can see all the unhappiness of my city. My heart now is made of a cheap
metal. But even that poor heart can feel, and so I cry.’
‘Oh,’ said the bird to himself, ‘he is not all gold - he is only gold on the outside.’
‘Far away from here,’ said the Happy Prince in a low voice, ‘there is a poor house in a
little street. Through an open window, I can see a woman at a table. Her face is very thin
and she has rough, red hands. She is making a dress for one of the queen’s ladies, for a
dance in the palace. Her little boy is lying on a bed in the corner of the room. He is very ill.
He is crying because she can only give him water from the river. Little bird, will you take
my red jewel to her? I cannot move from here.’
‘My friends are waiting for me in Egypt,’ said the bird.
‘Little bird, little bird,’ said the prince, ‘please stay with me for one night and do this for
me. The boy is crying and his mother is so unhappy.’
The Happy Prince looked very sad, and the little bird was sorry for him. ‘It is very cold
here,’ he said, ‘but I will stay with you for one night. Tomorrow I will take the jewel.’
Thank you, little bird,’ said the prince.

So the bird took the great red jewel from the prince’s waist and flew away with it over the
–    –roofs of the town. He passed the palace and heard the sound of dancing. A beautiful girl
was at a window with her lover. ‘I hope my dress will be ready for the dance next week,’
she said. ‘Those women are so lazy.’
The bird passed over the river and flew and flew. At last he came to the poor little
house and looked inside. The boy was lying on the bed. The mother was asleep; she was
so tired. He flew in and put the great red jewel on the table. Then he flew round the bed,
moving the air around the boys face with his wings.
‘Oh,’ said the boy, ‘my face does not feel so hot. I think I am getting better.’ And he fell
asleep.
Then the bird flew back to the Happy Prince. ‘It is strange,’ the bird said. ‘It is very
cold, but I feel quite warm.’
‘That is because you have done a good thing,’ said the prince. The little bird fell
asleep.

When day came, the bird flew down to the river for a bath. A clever man saw him. ‘That is
very unusual!’ he said. ‘That kind of bird, here in winter! I must write that down!’
‘I will go to Egypt tonight,’ thought the bird.
When the moon came up, he flew back to the Happy Prince.
‘Can I do anything for you in Egypt?’ he said.
‘Little bird, little bird,’ said the prince, ‘please will you stay with me for one more night?’
‘My friends are waiting for me,’ answered the bird.
‘Far away across the city,’ said the prince, ‘I can see a young writer in a little room at
the top of a house. He is sitting at a table that is covered with papers. At his side there are
some dead flowers. He is trying to finish a story. But he is very cold and he cannot write.
There is no fire in the room, and he is weak and hungry.’
‘I will wait with you for one more night,’ said the bird kindly. ‘What shall I take to him?’
‘Take him one of my eyes,’ said the prince. ’They are made of beautiful blue stones
from India. The young man can sell it and buy wood and food. He can finish his story.’
‘Take out your eye, dear prince?’ said the bird. ‘I cannot do that!’ And he began to cry.
‘Do it!’ said the prince.
So the bird took out the prince’s eye and flew away to the young man’s room. It was
easy to get in because there was a hole in the roof. The young man was sitting with his
head in his hands, so he did not hear the bird’s wings. When he looked up, a beautiful blue
jewel was lying on the dead flowers.
‘Someone likes my stories!’ he cried happily. ‘This is a gift from someone who has
read my books. Now I can finish writing this story!’

On the next day the bird flew down to the river. He watched the seamen working on the
ships. ‘I am going to Egypt!’ he cried, but no one listened to him.
‘When the moon came up, he flew back to the Happy Prince. I have come to say
goodbye to you,’ he said.
‘Little bird, little bird,’ said the prince, ‘please will you stay with me for one more night?’
‘It is winter,’ answered the bird. ‘The snow will soon come. In Egypt the sun is warm
–    –and the trees are green. Dear prince, I must leave you; but I will never forget you.’
A little girl is standing there in the square below. She is selling eggs. Her eggs have
fallen on the ground and they are broken. She has no money to take home. Her father will
hit her. Take out my other eye and give it to her.’
‘I will stay with you for one more night,’ said the bird, ‘but I cannot take out your other
eye. You will not be able to see!’
‘Do it!’ said the prince.
So the bird took out the prince’s other eye and flew down with it. He flew to the girl and
put the jewel in her hand.
‘This is a beautiful piece of glass!’ cried the little girl. She ran home, laughing.
Then the bird flew back to the prince. ‘You cannot see now,’ he said, ‘so I will stay with
you.’
‘No,’ said the poor prince, ‘you must go to Egypt.’
‘I will stay with you,’ repeated the bird, and he slept at the prince’s feet.
The next day he stayed with the prince. He told the prince stories about the strange
lands that he knew.
‘Dear little bird,’ said the prince, ‘you are telling me about strange and wonderful
things, but the suffering of men and women is stranger than anything. Fly over my city,
little bird. Tell me what you see there.’
So the swallow flew over the great city. He saw the rich eating, and drinking in their
beautiful houses. He saw the poor people sitting at the gate. He flew into the dark streets
and saw the white faces of hungry children with sad eyes. Under a bridge, two little boys
were lying close together to keep warm. ‘We are so hungry!’ they said. ‘You cannot lie
there!’ shouted a guard.
Then the bird flew back and told the prince.
‘I am covered with fine gold,’ said the prince. ‘Take it off, piece by piece, and give it to
my poor people.’
The bird pulled off the gold, until the Happy Prince looked grey and ugly. The bird took
the gold to the poor, and the children’s faces became brighter. ‘ We have bread now!’ they
cried.

Then the snow came. Ice followed the snow, and hung down from the roofs of the houses.
Everyone wore thick coats.
The little bird became colder. He did not leave the prince, because he loved him too
much. But he was dying.
‘Goodbye, dear prince!’ he said. ‘Can I kiss you?’
‘I am glad that you are going to Egypt,’ said the prince. ‘You have stayed too long. Kiss
me, because I love you.’
‘I am not going to Egypt,’ said the bird. ‘I am going to the House of Death.’ He kissed
the prince, and fell down dead at his feet. Then there was a strange sound inside the
statue. CRACK – the metal heart broke into two pieces.
Early next morning, an important man in the city was walking below with two of his
friends. He looked up at the statue. ‘The Happy Prince does not look very bright!’ he said.
’The red stone has disappeared, his eyes are not there, and he is not golden. He looks like
a beggar.’
–    –‘Yes he does!’ said the man’s friends.
‘Here is a dead bird at his feet!’ said the officer. ‘We must make an order that birds
cannot die here.’
They pulled down the statue of the Happy Prince and put it in the fire. A stream of
bright metal ran out.
‘This is strange!’ said the workmen. ‘This broken piece in the middle of the statue has
stayed hard. We mus: throw it away.’ So they threw it away with the dead bird.

God said to his servants, ‘Bring me the two best things in the city.’ They brought Him the
broken heart and the dead bird.
‘Yes, you have brought the right things,’ God said. ‘This little bird will sing for ever in
my garden, and the Happy Prince will stand in my city of gold.’
–    –The Fisherman and his Soul
The young fisherman went out in his boat every evening, and threw his nets into the water.
Sometimes he did not catch much. But sometimes the fish came in from the deep sea and
swam into his nets. Then he took them and sold them in the town.
One evening the net was very heavy. The young fisherman laughed. ‘Perhaps I have
caught all the fish in the sea!’ he thought. He pulled and pulled, and the net came nearer
and nearer to the boat. At last it came to the top of the water. There were no fish in it - only
a sleeping mermaid. Her hair was like gold; her body was silver and pearl. She was very
beautiful. The young fisherman picked her up in his arms.
When he touched her, she opened her deep-blue eyes with fear. She tried to escape,
but he held her tightly.
She began to cry. ‘Please, please don’t take me away!’ she said. ‘I am the daughter of
the King of the Sea. He only has me and he is old and alone.’
The fisherman answered, ‘You can go if you make a promise. When I call you, you
must come to me. You must come to me and sing. The fish love the song of the People of
the Sea. They will come and my nets will be full.’
So the mermaid promised. The fisherman opened his arms, and she disappeared into
the water.

Every evening after that, when the young fisherman went out in his boat, he called to the
mermaid. She came up out of the water and sang the songs of the People of the Sea. She
sang about the king’s palace, with its roof of clear blue jewels and its pearl floor. She sang
about the gardens of the sea. The big fish came in from the deep sea to listen to her
songs. Then the young fisherman threw his nets round them and caught them. When his
boat was full, the mermaid disappeared into the sea.
The mermaid never came close to him. Once he tried to touch her, but she went down
into the water. He did not see her again that day. Each day the sound of her voice became
sweeter in his ears. He forgot about his nets and his boat. The fish came, but he did not
see them. He sat in his boat and listened. Darkness closed round him, and the moonlight
changed his brown arms to silver.
One evening the young fisherman called to the mermaid, ‘Little mermaid, I love you.
Take me as your husband.’
But the mermaid answered, ‘No, you have a man’s soul. Send away your soul, and I
will love you.’
The young fisherman said, ‘I do not need my soul. I cannot see it. I cannot touch it. Of
course I will send it away!’ He held out his arms. ‘I will send my soul away and you will be
my wife. We will live in the deepest part of the sea, and you will show me the wonderful
things in your songs.’
The little mermaid laughed with happiness and hid her face in her hands.
‘But how can I send my soul away?’ cried the fisherman.’Tell me how to do it.’
‘I do not know,’ said the little mermaid. ‘The People of the Sea have no souls.’ She
looked at him sadly and swam away.
–    ––    –
Early the next morning the young fisherman went to a priest’s house. ‘Father,’ he said, ‘I
am in love with one of the People of the Sea. But I cannot marry her because I have a
soul. Tell me how to send my soul away. I do not need it. I cannot see it. I cannot touch it.’
The priest answered, ‘Stupid man! Your soul was given to you by God. It is the most
important thing that you have. It is like the gold and jewels of kings. The People of the Sea
have no souls and, like animals, do not know right from wrong.’
‘Father,’ said the young fisherman, ‘I caught the daughter of the King of the Sea in my
net. She is more beautiful than the morning star, and whiter than the moon. I will give my
soul for her body. I must send my soul away.’
‘Go away! Go away!’ cried the priest.
The young fisherman went into the city. The market-sellers called to him, ‘What are
you selling today?’
‘I will sell my soul. I do not need it.’
The market-sellers laughed at him. ‘We do not want to buy your soul. What can we do
with it? Sell us your body and become a slave, but do not talk about your soul.’
The young fisherman thought, ‘This is very strange. The priest tells me that a soul
costs more than gold and jewels. I do not understand.’ He went down by the sea to think.
At last he remembered that there was a witch near the beach. He ran along the sand
to the place where she lived. She knew by magic that he was coming. She laughed and
waited for him.
‘What do you want?’ she cried, as he ran towards her. ‘I can give you anything, but
everything has its price.’
‘I only want one small thing,’ said the young fisherman. ‘But the priest was angry when
I asked him for it. And the market-sellers laughed at me. So I have come to you.’
‘What do you want?’ asked the witch, coming nearer.
‘I want to send my soul away from me,’ answered the young fisherman.
‘What will you give me if I help you?’ asked the witch, looking at him with her beautiful
eyes.
‘Five pieces of gold, and my nets, my house and my boat. But tell me how I can lose
my soul.’
She laughed. ‘I am a witch. I can have all the gold and silver that I want.’
‘So what shall I give you? What shall I do?’ She put her thin white hand on his head
and smiled at him.
‘You must dance with me, pretty boy,’ she said.
‘Only that? Nothing more?’ cried the young fisherman.
‘Only that,’ she answered, and she smiled at him again.
‘We must dance when the moon is full. Tonight you will come to the top of the
mountain. It is the witches’ meeting place, and He will be there.’
‘Who is “He”?’ asked the young fisherman. ‘Come tonight. Stand near the tree on the
top of the mountain and wait for me. When the moon is full, I will be with you. Then we will
dance together on the grass.’
‘But you will help me to send my soul away?’
The sunlight shone on her red hair. ‘I will,’ she answered.
–    –‘You are the best of witches,’ cried the young fisherman, ‘and I will dance with you
tonight.’
He smiled at her. Then he ran happily back to the town.
The witch watched him as he went. ‘He will be mine!‘ she said. ‘I am as beautiful as
she is.’

That evening, the young fisherman climbed to the top of the mountain and stood under the
tree in the moonlight. The sea lay far down below, and the shadows of the fishing boats
moved on the water.
At midnight the witches came flying through the air.
‘Phew!’ they said, as they came down to the ground. ‘What is this smell? There is a
stranger here!’
The young witch came last. She wore a gold dress and her long red hair flew out
behind her. ‘Where is he? Where is he?’ cried the witches, when they saw her.
She laughed and ran to the tree and took the fisherman’s hand. She pulled him out
into the moonlight and began to dance with him. The other witches began to dance too,
round and round. Then there was the sound of a horse, but he could not see a horse. He
felt afraid.
‘Faster! Faster!’ cried the witch. She put her arms round his neck. He knew that
something terrible was watching him. Then he saw someone under the shadow of a rock.
It was a man, dressed in black. His face was white, but his mouth was like a red
flower. His hands were white and heavy with rings. He watched the young fisherman as he
danced. Suddenly the dancers stopped and went to kiss the mans hands. He smiled
proudly, but he was still looking at the fisherman.
‘Now we must go to him,’ said the witch, and the fisherman followed her. But when he
was close to the man, the young fisherman suddenly called out God’s name. He did not
know why he called it.
The witches cried out and flew away. The man closed his eyes in pain. He called to his
horse, jumped up on to its back, then turned and looked sadly at the fisherman.
The witch with the red hair tried to fly away too, but the fisherman caught her arm and
held her.
‘Take your hand off me!’ she cried.
‘No!’ he answered.
‘First, you must tell me the secret.’
‘What secret?’ said the witch, fighting like a wild cat.
‘You know!’ he answered.
There were tears in her green eyes. ‘I am as beautiful as the Daughter of the Sea,’ she
said.
He pushed her away. ‘If you do not keep your promise, I will kill you.’
Her face was grey. ‘All right,’ she said. ‘It is your soul, not mine.’ She took out a little
knife in a green case. ‘The shadow of the body is the body of the soul. Stand by the sea,
with your back to the moon. Cut your shadow away from your feet and order your soul to
leave you.’
He took the knife. Then he began to climb down the mountain. His soul inside him
called out, ‘I have lived with you for many years and I have been your servant. Do not
–    –send me away from you! How have I hurt you?’
The young fisherman laughed. ‘You have not hurt me, but I do not need you. My love
is calling me.’ He stood on the sand, with his back to the moon. His shadow lay in front of
him.
His soul said, ‘If I must go away, do not send me away without heart. There is no love
or kindness in the world, and I am afraid. need to take your heart with me.’
‘My heart belongs to my love,’ he answered. ‘So do not wait – go! I do not need you.’
The young fisherman took the little knife out of its case and ut away the shadow from
round his feet. It stood up in front of him. It was just like him. He stepped back and put
away the knife. He was afraid. ‘Go!’ he said. ‘I never want to see you again!;
‘No! We must meet again,’ said the soul.
‘How will we meet?’ cried the young fisherman. ‘Will you follow me into the deepest
part of the sea?’
‘Once every year I will come to this place and call to you,’ said the soul. ‘Perhaps you
will need me.’
‘Why will I need you?’ cried the young fisherman. ‘But do what you like.’ Then he
jumped into the sea. The little mermaid came up to meet him. She put her arms round his
neck and kissed him. Then they went down into the sea.
The soul went away, crying.

After a year, the soul came down to the sea and called to the young fisherman. He came
out of the sea and said, ‘Why are you calling me?’
The soul answered, ‘Come nearer. I want to tell you about the wonderful things that I
have seen.’ So the fisherman came nearer and listened. ‘When I left you,’ the soul said to
him, ‘I travelled to the east. All wise things come from the east. I arrived at a city, walked
through its streets and came to the garden of its god. “I want to see your god,” I said to
one of the priests, and he took me to a house in the garden. There was no god there, only
a metal mirror on a stone table.
‘I said to the priest, “Where is the god?”
‘He said, “There is no god, but this is a special mirror. It shows everything on earth.
When you have this mirror, you know everything. Nothing is hidden from you.”
‘I stole the mirror and I have hidden it close to here. Take me as your soul again, and
you will be wiser than all the wise men.’
The young fisherman laughed. ‘Love is better than understanding,’ he cried. ‘And the
little mermaid loves me.’ He went back into the sea. The soul went away, crying.

After the second year, the soul came down to the sea and called to the young fisherman.
The fisherman came up out of the sea and said, ‘Why are you calling me?’
‘Come nearer,’ the soul answered. ‘I want to tell you about the wonderful things that I
have seen. When I left you, I travelled to the south. All gold and jewels come from the
south. After many days I came to Ashtar. The king of that city has a special ring on his
finger. If you have that ring, you are richer than all the kings in the world. I went into the
king’s palace. The soldiers hit me, but they could not hurt me. The king said, “Who are
you? Why can’t we hurt you? Please leave here tonight. While you are here, I am not king
–    –of this city.” I answered, “I will go if you give me your ring.”’
Then the soul said to the fisherman, ‘I have hidden the ring in a place not far from
here. Come with me and take it. You will be richer than all the kings in this world.’
The young fisherman laughed. ‘Love is better than gold and jewels,’ he cried. ‘And the
little mermaid loves me.’ He went back into the sea. The soul went away, crying.

At the end of the third year, the soul came down to the sea and called to the fisherman.
When he came, the soul said, ‘Come nearer. I want to tell you about the wonderful things
that I have seen. On my journeys I came to a city where there is a house near the river.
Seamen come to that house and drink wine. As I sat there, an old man came in. He played
music, and a girl came and danced. Her face was covered and I could not see it. But her
white feet moved like little birds. They were the most beautiful feet that I have ever seen. It
was the most wonderful dancing. It is only a few days’ journey from this place.’
The young fisherman remembered that the little mermaid had no feet. She could not
dance. So he said, ‘All right. It is only a short journey, and then I can return to my love.’ He
climbed out on to the land and held out his arms to his soul. The soul cried with happiness
and went into him.
They travelled all that night and came to a city. As they walked along a street of
jewellers, the young fisherman saw a fine silver cup. The soul said to him, ‘Take that cup
and hide it.’ So he took the cup and they left the city quickly.
But then the young fisherman threw the cup away. ‘Why did you tell me to take that
cup?’ he said to his soul. ‘It was wrong.’
But his soul answered, ‘It does not matter.’
On the evening of the second day, they came to another city. As they walked along the
street, the young fisherman saw a child with a pot of water. His soul said to him, ‘Hit that
child.’ So he hit the child, and the child cried. Then they left the city quickly.
But then the young fisherman became angry. ‘Why did you tell me to hit that child? It
was wrong.’
But his soul answered, ‘It does not matter.’
Late on the evening of the third day, they came to another city. The young fisherman
sat down and rested. After some time, a man came past them. ‘Why are you sitting here in
the street?’ he said.
The young fisherman answered, ‘I have nowhere to sleep. I have no friends in this
city.’
The man said, ’Aren’t we all brothers? Didn’t one God make us all? Come with me to
my house.’
So the young fisherman slept at the man’s house. In the middle of the night, his soul
woke him and said, ‘Go to the man’s room. Kill him and take his gold. We need it.’ The
young fisherman went to the man’s room. There was a knife near his bed, and there were
three bags of gold. The young fisherman put out his hand and touched the knife, but the
man woke up. ‘Are you paying for my kindness with blood?’ he said.
The soul said, ‘Kill him!’ So the young fisherman killed the man and took the bags of
gold.
When they were away from the city, the young fisherman said, ‘Why did you tell me to
kill the man? Why did you tell me to take his gold?’
The soul answered, ‘It does not matter.’
–    –‘No!’ cried the young fisherman. ‘It does matter. Why have you done this to me?’
His soul answered, ‘ When you sent me out into the world, you did not give me a
heart.’
The young fisherman said, ‘You are bad. I forget my love when I am with you.’ He
threw the bags of gold away. ‘I sent you away before, and I will send you away again!’
He turned his back to the moon. Then, with the little knife, he tried to cut away the
shadow of the body which is the soul. But the soul said, ‘A man can only send his soul
away once in his life. You must keep me with you for ever.’
The young fisherman said, ‘I will go back to the place where tlie mermaid sang. I will
call her. I will tell her about the bad tilings that I have done.’
His soul said, ‘There are many women who are more beautiful. There are the dancing
girls of Samaris. They laugh while they dance. Come with me to that city.’
The young fisherman did not answer. He travelled back to the place where his love
sang. He called to the little mermaid, but she did not come. He built a hut in the rocks and
he called to the mermaid every morning and every night. But she never came up out of the
sea to meet him.

A year passed, and the soul thought, ‘I have offered him bad things, but his love has been
too great. Now I will offer him good things, and perhaps he will come with me.’
So the soul said, ‘I have told you about the happiness of the world. Now I will tell you
about the world’s pain. I will tell you about people who are hungry, poor and sick. Let’s go
and help those people.’
But the young fisherman did not answer.

A second year passed, and the soul said, ‘Your love is stronger than I am. Let me into your
heart and then I can be part of you again.’
‘Of course you can come in,’ said the young fisherman.
‘I cannot find a way into your heart,’ said his soul. ‘There is no room, because your
heart is so full of love.’
‘I would like to help you,’ said the fisherman.
As he spoke, a great sound of crying came from the sea. One of the People of the Sea
was dead. The young fisherman left his hut and ran down to the water.
Black waves hurried in to the land and they brought with them the body of the little
mermaid. The fisherman threw himself down next to her and held her in his arms. He
kissed the cold red mouth.
More waves came. The sound of crying came from the palace of the Sea King. ‘The
sea is coming,’ said his soul. ‘If you stay here, it will kill you. Come away.’
But the young fisherman did not listen. ‘Love is better than being wise or rich,’ he said
to the little mermaid. ‘Love is beautiful. I was bad and I left you. Then I called you and you
did not come. But my love stayed with me and was always strong. Now you are dead, and
I will die with you.’
The sea came nearer and tried to cover him with its waves. The fisherman knew that
the end was near. He kissed the cold face of the mermaid, and then his heart broke. His
soul found a way into it, and became part of him again.
And the sea covered the young fisherman.
–    –The Nightingale and the Rose
‘She said, “I will dance with you if you bring me a red rose”,’ cried the young student, ’but
there are no red roses in my garden. I have studied everything that wise men have written.
But my life is unhappy because I have no red rose!’ His eyes filled with tears.
A little nightingale heard him from her old tree.
‘Here, at last, is a true lover,’ said the nightingale. ‘I have sung about true love night
after night, but I have never seen a true lover!’
‘There will be a dance at the palace tomorrow,’ said the student. ‘The prince will be
there, and my love will be there too. If I bring her a red rose, she will dance with me. If I
bring her a red rose, I will hold her in my arms. But there are no red roses in my garden, so
I will sit alone. She will not need me, and my heart will break.’
‘Yes, he is a true lover, like the lovers in my songs,’ said the nightingale. ‘Love is
happiness to me, but it is pain to him. Love is a wonderful thing. Gold and jewels can
never buy it.’
The student cried, ‘The musicians will play and my love will dance to the music. Rich
men in their fine clothes will crowd round her. But she will not dance with me because I
cannot give her a red rose.’ He lay down on the grass, put his face in his hands and cried.
‘Why is he crying?’ asked the little animals in the garden. ‘Why is he crying? ‘ asked
the flowers.
‘He is crying for a red rose,’ said the nightingale. ‘For a red rose!’ they cried, and they
laughed. But the nightingale understood. She opened her brown wings and flew up into
the air. She passed across the garden like a shadow.

There was a beautiful rose tree standing in the centre of another garden. When she saw it,
she flew down to it.
‘Give me a red rose,’ she cried, ‘and I will sing you my sweetest song.’
‘I am sorry,’ said the rose tree. ‘My roses are white — as white as snow. Go to my
brother on the other side of the garden. Perhaps he will give you what you want.’
So the nightingale flew to the other rose tree. ‘Give me a red rose,’ she cried, ‘and I
will sing you my sweetest song.’
‘I am sorry,’ answered the rose tree. ‘My roses are yellow -golden yellow. But go to my
brother who grows below the student’s window. Perhaps he will give you what you want.’
So the nightingale flew to the rose tree which was growing below the student’s
window.
‘Give me a red rose,’ she cried, ‘and I will sing you my sweetest song.’
\My roses are red,’ it answered, ‘but the winter cold has frozen my flowers and they
have fallen. I will have no roses this year.’
‘I only want one red rose,’ cried the nightingale, ‘only one red rose! How can I get it?’
‘There is a way,’ answered the tree. ‘But I do not want to tell you about it.’
‘Tell me the way, please,’ said the nightingale. ‘I am not afraid.’
–    ––    –‘If you want a red rose,’ said the tree, ’you must build it out of music by moonlight. The
redness must come from your hearts blood. You must sing to me all night with your heart
pressed against a thorn. The thorn must cut open your heart and your life blood must run
into me and become mine.’
‘Death is a great price to pay for a red rose,’ cried the nightingale. ‘I enjoy life. I love
sitting in the green trees and watching the golden sun go down. I love smelling the flowers.
But love is better than life, and the heart of a man is more important than the heart of a
bird.’
So she opened her brown wings and flew up into the air. She passed over the garden
where the young student was still lying in the grass.The tears were not yet dry in his eyes.
‘Be happy,’ cried the nightingale. ‘You will have your red rose. I will build it out of music
by moonlight, and I will give my heart’s blood for it redness. But you must be a true lover,
because love is the wisest aid strongest thing.’
The student locked up from the grass and listened. But he could not understand what
the nightingale was saying. He only knew things that are written in books. But the old tree
loved the little nightingale, and he understood.
‘Sing me one last song,’ he said. ‘I shall be sad and alone when you go.’
So the nightingale sang to the old tree. Her voice was like drops of water faling from a
silver cup.
When she finished her song, the student took out a notebook.
‘Her voice is beautiful, but her song does not mean anything. It is not really useful
because she has no true feelings. She thinks only of her music, not about other people.’
He went into his room, lay down on his bed and thought ibout his love. After a time, he
fell asleep.

When the moon shone in the sky, the nightingale flew to the rose tree. She pressed
herself against a thorn. She sang all night, and the cold moon listened. All through the long
night she sang, and the thorn went deeper and deeper, and the life-blood ran out of her.
First she sang about the birth of love in the heart of a boy and a girl — and a wonderful
rose grew on the highest part of the rose tree. As song followed song, the rose opened. At
first it was white - as white as a cloud on a river, as silver as the wings of the early
morning.
The rose tree cried to the nightingale, ‘Press closer against the thorn, little nightingale.
The rose must be red before daylight.’
So the nightingale pressed closer, and her song became louder. Now she sang about
the birth of love in the hearts of a man and a woman. The rose became red. But the heart
of the rose stayed white, because only the heart’s blood of a nightingale can colour the
heart of a rose.
The rose tree cried to the nightingale, ‘Press closer against the thorn, little nightingale.
Or the day will come before the rose is red.’
So the nightingale pressed closer against the thorn. The thorn touched her heart, and
pain shot through her. As the pain became worse, her song became wilder. Now she sang
of the love which is made perfect by death.
The rose became deep red. The heart of the rose was as red as a jewel. But the
nightingale’s voice became weaker and weaker. Her little wings stopped moving; her eyes
–    –lost their brightness.
She sang a last, wonderful song. The moon heard it and waited in the sky. The red
rose heard it and opened wide to the cold morning air.
‘Look! Look!’ cried the rose tree. ‘The rose is ready now.’ But the nightingale did not
answer, because she was lying dead in the long grass with the thorn in her heart.

At midday, the student opened his window and looked out. ‘Ha!’ he cried. ‘Here is a red
rose! It is exactly what I wanted! I have never seen a rose as beautiful as this. It probably
has a long Latin name.’ He put out his hand and took it.
Then he put on his hat and ran to the doctor’s house with the rose in his hand. The
doctor was the student’s teacher, and the student loved the doctor’s daughter. She was
sitting at the door, and her little dog was lying at her feet.
‘You wanted me to bring you a red rose,’ cried the student. ‘Here is the reddest rose in
the world. You can wear it tonight next to your heart. Then we can dance together. And
you will know how I love you.’
‘I am sorry,’ said the girl. ‘It will not go with the colour of my dress. And the officer has
sent me some real jewels. Everyone knows that jewels cost more than flowers.’
‘Thank you very much!’ said the student angrily. ‘You are very kind!’ He threw the rose
into the street.
‘You cannot speak to me like that,’ said the girl. ‘Who are you? Only a student!’ She
got up from her chair and went into the house.
‘Love is a very silly thing!’ said the student, as he walked away. ‘It tells us things which
are not going to happen. We believe things which are not true. It is useless. In these
difficult times, we must learn useful things. I shall go back to my studies.’
So he returned to his room, took out a big old book, and began to read.
–    –The Star Child
Two woodcutters were going home through the forest. It was winter, and very cold. There
was thick snow the ground and on the trees. The river was frozen. The snow was very
deep, and the woodcutters went slowly They were careful, because it is easy to lose your
way in the snow.
At last they saw the lights of their village far down below them. They laughed because
they were glad. But then they were sad. ‘Why do we want to live? Life is so hard for poor
people like us.’
Then a strange: thing happened: a very bright and beautiful star fell out of the sky. It
seemed to fall behind some trees quite near them.
They ran towards it. ‘Perhaps there will be a pot of gold where it fell!’ they thought.
The first woodcutter reached the place. He saw a coat of gold lying on the white snow.
It had silver star on it. The woodcutters opened the coat to take the pieces of gold from it.
But there was no gold. There was only a little child.
One of the men said, ‘This is a sad ending to our hopes! We do not need a child. We
are poor men and we already have children. We cannot give their food to another child.
Let’s leave it here.’
The other man said, ‘We cannot leave the child here. It will die in the cold. I am as
poor as you are. I have many mouths to feed and not much food for them. But I will take
the child home with me. My wife will look after it.’
So he picked up the child. He put the coat round it to keep out the cold. Then he went
down the hill to his village.
When they came to the village, his friend said, ‘You have the child – give me the coat.’
But the other man answered, ‘That coat isn’t ours. It belongs to the child’
Then he went to his house. His wife opened the door and kissed him.
He said, ‘I have found something in the forest and I have brought it to you. I know that
you will look after it.’
‘What is it?’ she asked. ‘We need many things.’
He opened the coat and showed her the sleeping child.
‘Oh!’ she said. ‘We have enough children! Why have you brought this strange child to
live here?’
‘It is a star child,’ he said, and he told her about it.
‘Our children haven’t enough bread. Must we feed another person’s child?’
A cold wind from the forest came through the open door. ‘Shut the door!’ she said.
‘The wind is cold.’
He said, ‘A cold wind always comes into a house where the heart is cold.’
She did not answer, but went nearer to the fire.
Soon she turned round and looked at him, and her eyes were full of tears. He put the
child in her arms. She kissed it and put it in a little bed with her youngest child.
The next day, the woodcutter took the golden coat and put it away in a big box.
–    ––    –
The star child grew up with the woodcutter’s children. He sat at the table for meals with
them and played with them. Every year he became more and more beautiful.
But the star child was only beautiful on the outside. He was proud and unkind. He
thought that he was better than the village children. ‘They are ordinary people,’ he thought,
‘but I am the child of a star. They are my servants.’
He threw stones at the poor and at people who asked for help: ‘Go to another place
and ask for bread! We have none to give you!’ He laughed at people who were weak and
ugly. He loved himself. In summer, he sat by the water and smiled down at his beautiful
face.
The woodcutter and his wife often spoke to him angrily: ‘We looked after you when you
needed our help. Why are you so unkind to people who need your help?’
The star child did not listen to them. He went back to the other children. He could run
fast, and dance, and make music. The other children followed the star child. When he
pushed a stick into the eyes of a little rabbit, they laughed. When he threw stones at a sick
man, they laughed. Their hearts became as hard as his.

One day, a poor woman came through the village. She looked like a beggar. Her clothes
were old and dirty, and there was blood on her feet. She sat down under a tree to rest.
The star child saw her and said, ‘Look at that ugly old beggar woman. Lets send her
away!’
So he came near and threw stones at her. She looked at him with fear in her eyes.
The woodcutter saw what the star child was doing. He ran to him and said, ’Why is your
heart so cold? What has this poor woman done to you?’
The star child was angry. ‘You cannot question me. I am not your son.’
‘That is true,’ said the woodcutter, ‘but I helped you. I was sorry for you when I found
you in the forest.’
When the old woman heard this, she made a loud noise. Then she fell to the ground.
The woodcutter carried her into the house to his wife. They brought food to her, but she
did not eat or drink.
She asked, ‘Did you say that the child was found in the forest? Was that ten years ago
— ten years ago today?’
‘Yes,’ said the woodcutter. ‘I found him in the forest exactly ten years ago.’
‘Did he have a coat of gold with silver stars on it?’
‘Yes,’ said the woodcutter. He took the coat out of the box and showed it to her.
‘He is my little son. I lost him in the forest. I have travelled the world, trying to find him.’
The woodcutter went out and called to the star child: ‘Come into the house. Your
mother is waiting there for you.’
The star child ran into the house. But when he saw the old woman, he laughed.
‘Where is my mother?’ he asked. ‘I can only see this dirty old beggar woman.’
The woman said, ‘I am your mother.’
He said, ‘I am not your son! You are dirty and ugly. Go away! I do not want to see your
face again!’
‘But it is true. You are my son,’ she cried. She fell on her knees and held out her arms
to him. ‘Thieves stole you from me and left you in the forest. But I knew you when I saw
–    –you. And I knew the coat of gold with silver stars. So please come with me. For many
years I have tried to find you. Come with me, my son. I need your love.’
But the star child did not move.
At last he spoke, and his voice was hard and angry. ‘If you are really my mother, I do
not want to know you. I thought that I was the child of a star, not the child of a beggar. So
go away. I do not want to see you again!’
‘Won’t you kiss me before I go?’ she cried. ‘I suffered so much while I was looking for
you.’
‘No,’ said the star child. ‘I will not.’
So the woman went away, crying, into the forest.
The star child was glad and ran back to his friends. But when they saw him, they said,
‘Go away, ugly face! You cannot play with us.’
‘Why did they say that to me?’ thought the star child. He went to the water and looked
into it. His face was ugly now.
He fell on the grass and cried. ‘This has happened to me because I have done wrong,’
he thought. ‘I have been unkind to my mother and sent her away. I will go and look for her.
I will not rest until I find her.’
So he ran away into the forest. He called for his mother all day, but there was no
answer. When the sun went down, he slept on the grass. The animals and birds
remembered his sticks and stones, and they ran away from him.
In the morning, he walked through the forest. He asked everything he met, ‘Have you
seen my mother?’ But the animals said. ‘You pushed sticks into our eyes. You threw
stones at us.’ And the birds said, ‘You cut our wings. You stole our eggs.’ The star child
cried and asked them to forgive him. Then he continued walking.
On the third day, he came out of the forest and into open country. He passed through
villages, and the children threw stones at him. The men sent him away.

The star child searched for three years. Sometimes he seemed to see his mother on the
road in front of him. He called to her and ran after her, but he never reached her. People
told him, ‘No, we have not seen her. Nobody has walked along this road.’ They laughed at
him.
One evening, he came to the gates of a great city. The soldier at the gate stopped him.
‘What do you want here?’
‘I am looking for my mother,’ he answered. ‘I want to come into this city, please.
Perhaps she is here.’
‘Your mother will not be pleased when she sees you. You are uglier than the ugliest
animal. Go away!’
Another soldier said, ‘Who is your mother and why are you trying to find her?’
He answered, ‘My mother is a beggar. I have been very unkind to her. I want her to
forgive me.’ But they stopped him going in.
He turned away, crying. Then an officer came. ‘Who is trying to come into this city?’ he
asked.
‘A beggar,’ they answered, ‘and he is the child of a beggar. So we are sending him
away.’
‘No!’ said the officer, laughing. ‘We will sell him as a slave. The price will be the price
–    –of a loaf of bread.’
A strange old man said, ‘I will buy him at that price.’ He paid the money and took the
star child into the city.
They went along many streets and came to a little door. The old man touched the door
with his ring, and it opened. They went down five steps into a garden. Then the old man
put a cloth over the star child’s eyes and pushed him into a building. When the cloth was
taken away, the child was in a dark prison.
The old man gave him a piece of bread and said, ‘Eat!’ And he gave him a cup of
water and said, ‘Drink!’ Then the old man went out. He shut and locked the door.
The old man was really a clever magician.
The next day, he came to the star child and said, ‘There is a forest near the south gate
of the city. In it there are three pieces of gold. One is white gold, one is yellow gold, and
the third is red gold. Today you must bring me the piece of white gold. If you do not bring it
back, I will hit you. Go! This evening I will wait for you at the door of the garden.’ He put a
cloth over the eyes of the star child and took him through the house and the garden and
up the five steps to the door. Then he sent him into the street.
The star child went out of the gate of the city and came to the forest. It was a beautiful
forest, but the plants under the trees cut his skin. He could not find the piece of white gold
anywhere. He looked for it all day. In the evening he turned back, crying.
As the star child came to the end of the wood, he heard a cry. He saw a rabbit. ‘Help
me! Free me!’ it cried.
‘I am a slave,’ said the star child, ‘but I can free you.’ So he freed the rabbit.
The rabbit answered, ‘You have helped me. What shall I do for you?’
‘I am looking for a piece of white gold. I cannot find it.’
‘Come with me,’ said the rabbit, ‘and I will take you to it. I know where it is hidden.’
So the star child went with the rabbit and found the piece of white gold in a tree. The
rabbit ran away and the star child went towards the city.
At the gate of the city, there was a man. His face and skin were eaten away by a
terrible illness. A grey cloth covered his face and there were two holes in the cloth for his
eyes. When he saw the star child, he cried out, ‘I have no food. Give me some money or I
will die.’
‘I only have one piece of gold,’ said the star child. ‘If I do not take it to my employer, he
will hit me.’
The sick man said again sadly, ‘Please give me some money, or I shall die.’ The star
child felt sorry for him and gave him the piece of white gold.
When the star child came to the magician’s house, the magician asked, ‘Have you got
the piece of white gold?’
‘No,’ said the star child, ‘I have not.’
So the magician hit him. Then he said, ‘Eat!’ but he did not give him any bread. He
said, ‘Drink’, but he gave him a cup with no water in it.
The next day, the magician came to the child and said, ‘Bring me the piece of yellow
gold today. If you do not bring it, I will hit you harder than yesterday. And I will keep you as
my slave.’
The star child went to the forest. All day he tried to find the piece of yellow gold. In the
evening, he sat down and began to cry. The little rabbit came to him.
‘Why are you crying?’ asked the rabbit.
–    –‘I am looking for a piece of yellow gold which is hidden here. If I do not find it, my
employer will hit me again.’
‘Follow me,’ said the rabbit, and it ran through the forest to a little stream. The piece of
yellow gold was lying in the sand at the bottom of the stream.
‘How can I thank you?’ said the star child. ‘This is the second time that you have
helped me.’
‘You helped me first,’ said the rabbit, and it ran away. The star child took the piece of
yellow gold and hurried back to the city. The sick beggar saw him. He cried out, ‘Give me
some money, or I will die!’
The star child said, ‘I only have one piece of gold. If I do not take it to my employer, he
will hit me. He will keep me as his slave.’ The sick man cried, and the star child felt sorry
for him. He gave him the piece of yellow gold.
When the star child came to the magician’s house, the magician opened the door.
‘Have you got the piece of yellow gold?’
‘No,’ said the star child, ‘I have not.’
So the magician hit him and put him in the prison.
The next day, the magician came to him and said, ‘If you bring me the piece of red
gold today, you will be free. But, if you do not bring it, I will kill you.’
The star child went to the forest. He looked for the piece of red gold all day. In the
evening, he sat down and cried. The little rabbit came to him.
The rabbit said, ‘The piece of red gold is in that hole in the rock behind you.’
‘How can I thank you?’ said the star child. ‘This is the third time that you have helped
me.’
‘You helped me first,’ said the rabbit, and it ran quickly away.
The star child looked in the hole and found the piece of red gold. He hurried back to
the city. The sick man saw him coming. He stood in the middle of the road and cried out to
him, ‘Give me the piece of red gold or I must die.’
The star child gave him the piece of red gold, saying, ‘You need it more than I do.’ But
he was very sad.
As the star child walked through the gate of the city, the soldiers greeted him. ‘That is
a beautiful young man!’ they said. A crowd of people followed him, shouting, ‘Nobody in
the world is as beautiful as this man!’ The star child thought, ‘They are laughing at me
because I am so unhappy.’
He lost his way in the crowd and suddenly he was in the great square. In that square
was the king’s palace.
The palace gate opened. Government officers ran out to greet him. They said, ‘We
have waited for you. You are the son of our king.’
The star child answered, ‘I am not a king’s son. I am the ugly child of a poor beggar
woman.’
Then an officer held up a mirror and asked, ‘Why do you think you are not beautiful?’
The star child saw that his face was beautiful again. But something new shone from
his eyes. It was love and kindness.
The officers stood in front of him and said, ‘Wise men told us about this day a long
time ago. We are waiting for you — for our new king. Take this crown and be our king.’
The star child said, ‘I cannot be your king, because I have been unkind to my mother. I
must find her and ask her to forgive me. I cannot stay here.’
–    –He turned away towards the city gate. Then, in the crowd, he saw the beggar woman
who was his mother. At her side stood the sick man.’
He cried out in happiness. He ran to them and threw himself down and kissed his
mother’s feet. ‘Mother,’ he said, ‘I was proud and unkind. Now please forgive me and take
me as your son.’
He held out his hands and touched the sick man’s feet and said, ‘I gave you money
three times because I was sorry for you. Ask my mother to speak to me.’
The star child’s mother put her hand on his head and said, ‘Stand up’.
He stood up and looked at them. Now they were a king and queen.
The queen said, ‘This is your father. You helped him when he was the sick man.’
And the king said, ‘This is your mother.’
Then they kissed him and took him into the palace.
So the star child became king. He gave bread and clothes to the poor, and was kind
and good to everyone. There was happiness in the land.
–    –The Selfish Giant
When the giant went away for seven years, the children played in his garden every
afternoon on their way back from school.
It was a large and lovely garden. Beautiful flowers grew in the grass, and there were
twelve fruit trees. In the spring, the fruit trees were covered with red and white flowers, and
later in the year wonderful fruit grew on them. The birds sang sweetly in the trees.
Sometimes the children stopped their games and listened to them. ‘We are so happy
here!‘ they said.
Then, one day, the giant came back. He saw the children playing in his garden. ‘What
are you doing here?’ he shouted in a very loud voice. The children ran away.
‘My garden is my garden,’ said the giant. ‘No one can play in it. Only me.’ So he built a
high wall round it and put up a notice: KEEP OUT. He was a very selfish giant.

So the children had nowhere to play. They tried to play on the road, but the road was dirty
and full of hard stones, and they did not like it. After their lessons, they walked round the
giant’s high wall and talked about the beautiful garden inside. ‘We were so happy there!’
they said.
The spring came, and there were flowers and little birds all over the country. But in the
garden of the selfish giant, it was still winter. The birds did not sing in it because there
were no children. The trees forgot to grow flowers. Snow covered the grass, and ice
covered the trees with silver. The north wind came, and the rain.
‘I cannot understand why the spring is so late,’ said the selfish giant. He was sitting at
the window of his house and looking out at his cold, white garden. ‘I hope there will be a
change in the weather.’
But the spring never came, and the summer did not come. When there was golden
fruit in every other garden, there was no fruit in the giant’s garden. It was always winter
there, with the north wind, and snow, and ice and rain.

The giant was lying in bed one morning when he heard some beautiful music. A little bird
was singing outside his window. It was the first birdsong in the garden for a very long time,
and it seemed to him the most beautiful music in the world. Then the north wind and the
rain stopped.
‘I believe that spring has come at last!’ said the giant. He jumped out of bed and
looked out.
His garden was full of children! They were coming in through a hole in the wall and
were climbing up into the trees. The giant saw a little child in every tree. The trees were
glad to have the children back. They were covered with flowers again. The birds were
flying around and singing with happiness, and flowers were looking up through the green
grass.
A very small boy was standing in the far corner of the garden. He could not reach up to
climb his tree. He was walking round it and crying. That tree was still covered with ice and
snow.
–    –‘I have been very selfish!’ said the giant. ‘Now I know why the spring did not come
here. I will put the little boy into the tree. Then I will pull down the wall and my garden will
be a children’s playground for ever.’
He was really sorry about his unkindness. So he went down, opened the door very
quietly, and went out into the garden. But when the children saw him, they were afraid.
All the children ran away except the little boy. His eyes were full of tears and he did not
see the giant. The giant came quietly behind him. He took the little boy carefully in his
hand and put him up into the tree. Then the tree was suddenly covered with flowers, and
the birds came and sang in it. The little boy put his arms round the giant’s neck and kissed
him.
The other children saw that the giant was not bad and selfish now. They came running
back.
‘It is your garden now, little children,’ said the giant, and he pulled down the wall.
When people walked along the road to the town, they could see into the garden. They
saw the giant playing with the children. ‘That is a beautiful garden!’ they said.
The children played all day. In the evening they came to the giant to say goodbye to
him.
‘But where is your little friend?’ he said. ‘Where is the little boy that I put into the tree?’
The giant loved him best because the little boy kissed him.
‘We do not know,’ answered the children. ’He has gone away.’
‘You must tell him to come tomorrow — he must come tomorrow.’ But the children
said, ‘We do not know where he lives. We only met him today.’ The giant felt very sad.
Every afternoon after school, the children came and played with the giant. But the
giant’s favourite little boy did not come back again. The giant was very kind to the other
children. But he wanted to see his first little friend. ‘I would really like to see him!’ he
thought.

Years passed, and the giant became very old and weak. He could not play in the garden
now. So he sat in a big chair and watched the children’s games and looked at his garden.
‘I have many beautiful flowers,’ he said, ‘but the most beautiful flowers are the children.’
One morning, when he was dressing himself, he looked out of the window. It was
winter, but he did not hate the winter now. The spring was only sleeping, and the flowers
were only resting. He waited happily for them to come again.
Suddenly he opened his eyes wide. He looked and looked again. Something
wonderful was happening! In the far corner of the garden, a tree was covered with
beautiful white flowers. The tree was golden, and silver fruit hung down from it. And the
little boy was standing under the tree.
The giant ran out into the garden and he hurried across the grass to the child. Then his
face became red and angry ‘Who has hurt you?’ he said. There was blood on the child’s
hands, and on his little feet. ‘Who has hurt you?’ cried the giant. ‘Tell me and I will kill him!’
‘No,’ said the child. ‘This pain is the pain of love.’
‘Who are you?’ asked the giant. He was afraid, and went down on his knees in front of
the little child.
‘You helped me to play in your garden,’ said the child. ‘Today you will come with me to
my garden in the sky.’
–    –
That afternoon the children came into the garden. They found the giant lying dead
under the tree. He was covered with white flowers.
There was a loud shout: “Forward, march!” They heard the
sound of marching feet as another regiment passed. They
followed them into the dark ill two long blue lines. They heard
more men marching behind them. All that day, the army marched
under a clear blue sky. They passed over hills and through
woods.
The young soldier walked along, saying nothing. He looked
around nervously. “What’s that noise?” he asked himself. “Is it
gunfire? And is that smoke?”
This is the story of a young American soldier named Henry
Fleming. When he is a boy, he dreams of going to war. He thinks
that war is an adventure. He wants to be a hero.
When he is older, his country is at war. The north of the
country is fighting against the south. Everyone is always talking
about the war. The newspapers are full of stories about great
battles. Henry leaves home and joins the army. When he puts on
his new uniform, he feels proud and excited. He is ready to fight
for his part of the country, the North.
He quickly discovers that a soldiers life isn’t always exciting.
He spends many months in an army camp. He and the other new
soldiers learn to march and to shoot. Henry has a lot of time to
think. He asks himself what he will do in a battle. Will he run or
fight? Is he as brave as the other men? He won’t know the
answers until the fighting starts.
After some time, the regiment laces the enemy. Henry and the
other new soldiers are tested. They measure their courage against
the enemy, their comrades, and themselves. Some are braver than
others. Henry tries to understand the reasons. Maybe they are
stronger than the others. Maybe they don’t understand the
Vdanger. Some soldiers try to help their comrades. Others only
help themselves. Who is right and who is wrong?
The war is seen through Henrys eyes, but he is like every other
young soldier. He is fighting in the American Civil War, but it is
like every other war.
The American Civil War was fought from      to     , between
the North and the South of the United States of America. The two
parts of the country were very different. In the South, the main
activity was farming. In the North, there were many big cities
and factories. The war started when the states of the South
wanted to leave the United States of America.
About two million men fought in the war for the North, and
about    ,    men fought for the South. Many of the battles
were fought in the South. A lot of this part of the country was
destroyed.
In The Red Badge of Courage, Henry belongs to a Northern
regiment. The battle in this book is like the Battle of
Chancellorsville. That was fought in Virginia in May     .
There were around    ,    men fighting for the North and
  ,    for the South. Many men were killed or wounded on both
sides. The South won the battle, but they later lost the war.
The writer of this book, Stephen Crane, was born in New Jersey
in     . He was the youngest child in a family of fourteen
children.
In     , he went to New York and began writing for a
newspaper. He lived in a poor area of the city. He wrote about
the people that he met there. In     , his first book came out. It
was called Maggie, A Girl of the Streets. He continued working
for other newspapers after this.
The Red Badge of Courage came out in     , and it made
Stephen Crane famous. Many people thought that Crane fought
in the Civil War. They didn’t know that he was born after the
VIwar. He was never a soldier, but he described a soldier’s life very
well. This book is very different from other books that were
written at this time. Crane wrote about the fear and suffering of
ordinary soldiers. In his book, they aren’t always heroes, and war
is not just an adventure.
Because of this book, Crane was able to work for other
American and foreign newspapers. In     , he traveled by ship
from the United States to Cuba. The ship was destroyed, and he
escaped in a small boat. He became very ill as a result. Two years
later, he wrote a story about his escape. The book was called The
Open Boat and Other Stories.
Stephen Crane went to live in England in     , and he became
friends with other famous writers there. He continued to travel
and to write for newspapers. He wrote about the war between
Greece and Turkey in     . He also wrote about the Spanish-
American War in     . He wrote two books of poems, The Black
Riders and Other Lines (    ) and War is Kind and Other Poems
(    ). His other books are Active Service (    ), Whilomville
Stories (    ) and Wounds in the Rain (    ).
Stephen Crane died in Germany in      at the age of twenty-
eight.
VIIChapter  
“I’m tired of waiting!”
In the cold early morning, the army was slowly waking up. It was
resting in some green hills. A wide brown river lay at its feet.
Across the river shone the red eyes of the enemy’s fires.
A tall soldier ran up from the river. “We’re going to move
tomorrow!” he shouted. Men in blue uniforms came closer to
listen. ”We’re going to attack the enemy!”
“That’s a lie!” said one soldier loudly. “We’re not going to
move!”
“It’s true!” said the tall soldier. “I heard it from a friend, and he
heard it from his brother. And his brother heard it from an
officer.”
“We can’t move!” said a young officer. “I’ve just put a new-
floor in my tent. It’s made of wood, and it cost a lot of money!”
Groups of men talked excitedly. Some of them believed the tall
soldier, but some of them had other ideas. One young soldier
listened without speaking. Then he went into his tent. He wanted
to be alone and to think.
“Are we really going to fight tomorrow?” he asked himself.
“What will happen to me?”
♦
When he was a boy, he dreamed of war. In his dreams, he was a
hero, fighting for his country and its people. Then when he was
older, his country was at war. The newspapers told stories ot
great battles. He wanted to join the brave soldiers in the blue
army because he didn’t want to miss this adventure.
His mother was against the idea. “Don’t be stupid. Henry” she
said. ”Why do you want to go? A soldiers life is hard. You don’t
know what it’s like. I don’t want you to get hurt. I need you here
on the farm more than the army needs you “
 “We’re going to attack the enemy!”He continued to read the newspapers. There was fine fighting
down there. He talked to the people in the town. “We’re
winning!” they said. “Our boys in blue are doing a wonderful
job!”
When he heard this, he couldn’t wait. He got up early one
morning and went into town. He came back wearing a blue
uniform. “I’ve joined the army;” he told his mother excitedly.
She didn’t look up. ”I see,” she said quietly. There were tears
in her eyes. She helped him pack his bags. “I put some new socks
and your best shirts into your bag,” she said. “You’ll always be
warm. And choose your friends carefully. There are a lot of bad
men in the army. Remember your father. He never drank and he
never used bad language. So be careful and be a good boy.”
Henry listened to his mother impatiently Then, when she
finished, he left. He turned back to say a last goodbye. He saw
his mother crying.
He went into town to say goodbye to his friends. He felt proud
in his new blue uniform. Young girls smiled at him and old men
waved. He felt like a hero already.
After a long trip by train, he arrived in the camp by the river.
♦
“We’ve been here for months,” he thought. “We’ve practiced
firing our rifles. And we’ve marched. And we’ve practiced and
marched again. I’m tired of waiting! Are we ever going to fight?”
The men sat and told stories. The older soldiers laughed at the
new ones. They shouted at them when they passed: “Fresh fish!”
They all waited together. They didn’t know why.
The young soldier saw the enemy once or twice. He was
guarding one side of the stream, and they were guarding the
other. He spoke to a small, thin man in gray. He liked him.
“You’re a good man,” said the gray soldier. Henry felt sorry that
they were at war.
 The older soldiers told terrible stories about the enemy soldiers.
“There are thousands and thousands of them,” they said.
“They’re strong and they’re hungry. Nothing can stop them!”
They talked about the smoke, fire, and blood of battle.
Henry didn’t always believe them. “They’re lying,” he told
himself. “They’re just trying to scare the new soldiers.”
He suddenly felt afraid as he imagined his first battle. “Will I
fight like a hero?” he asked himself”. “Or will I run away?”
The tall soldier came into the tent, followed by the loud soldier.
They were still talking angrily. “You’ll see! There’ll be a big
battle tomorrow, I’m sure!” said the tall soldier.
The young soldier looked at him. “Jim, do yon think the
regiment will fight very well?”
“They’ll fight all right when they start shooting.”’ replied the
tall soldier calmly.
The young soldier continued, “Do you think any of the boys
will run away?”
The tall soldier thought for a minute. “Maybe a few of them
will run when the fighting starts. They’re a new regiment, so you
never know. I think they’ll fight as well as the others.”
“And you, Jim?” asked the young soldier. “Do you think you’ll
run?”
“Maybe I’ll run if the others run,” he replied. “But if the others
fight. I’ll fight with them.”
“You don’t know what you’ll do!” said the loud soldier.
But Henry wasn’t listening. “I’m glad Jim said that,” he said
to himself. “I’m not the only one who’s scared.”
Chapter   “We’re leaving!”
The next morning, the young soldier learned that the tall soldier
was wrong. The army didn’t move the next day, or the next, but
 stayed in the camp. Henry had time to think. And he had time to
worry.
He listened to his comrades talking excitedly about the battle.
“Aren’t they afraid?” he asked himself. “Maybe they’re braver
than I am. Or maybe they’re just hiding their fear.” He began to
feel angry with himself. He was also angry with the generals.
“Why don’t we move? What are they waiting for?”
Then, early one morning, the young soldier woke up to the
sound of loud voices: “Get up! We’re leaving!”
It was still dark as he joined the other soldiers. They formed a
line, carrying their rifles and equipment. They could see the red
fires of the enemy camp across the river. They stood waiting for
a long time.
Finally, an officer on horseback arrived with their orders. There
was a loud shout:” Forward, march!” They heard the sound of
marching feet as another regiment passed. They followed them
into the dark in two long blue lines. They heard more men
marching behind them. All that day, the army marched under a
clear blue sky. They passed over hills and through woods.
The young soldier walked along, saying nothing. He looked
around nervously. “What’s that noise?” he asked himself. “Is it
gunfire? And is that smoke?”
He looked into the faces of his comrades. He was hoping to see
fear and worry. To his surprise, they were excited and happy.
Some were discussing the army’s plans for them.
The tall soldier was speaking. “You see? We’re moving away
from the river. We’re going to come in behind the enemy lines.”
“He’s right!” said another man. “I had the same idea!”
Other voices spoke. “Me too!”
Not everyone agreed. “You’re all crazy!” said a loud voice.
“You don’t know where we’re going!”
Other men were laughing and joking. Henry didn’t join in their
conversations or their jokes. He felt sad and alone.
 A fat soldier tried to steal a horse from a farmyard. He wanted
it to carry his bag. He was escaping with his prize, when a young
girl ran out from the farmhouse. She pulled the horse by the head
and the fat soldier pulled on the other side.
The regiment stopped. They called to the young girl: “Hit him
with a stick! “They laughed at the fat soldier as he returned to the
line with his bag. They waved happily to the girl as they
continued their march. They forgot the war for a few minutes.
In the evening, the line broke into regiments again. The
regiments went into the fields to make camp. Soon there were
tents and campfires on all sides.
The young soldier left his camp and walked into the quiet
night. He lay down in the soft grass. He looked at the moon
shining through the trees. He felt very lonely. “Why did I leave
home?” he thought. He missed the farm. He thought about the
fields and the house. “That’s where I belong. I’m not a soldier.
I’m not like the others.”
He heard a noise in the grass and saw the loud soldier.
“Wilson!” he called.
The loud soldier came near and looked down. “Hello, Henry. Is
it you? What are you doing here?”
“Oh, just thinking,” replied the young soldier.
The other man sat down and lit his pipe. “You don’t look very
happy,” he said. “What’s wrong?”
“Oh, nothing,” replied Henry.
The loud soldier started talking about the battle. “This time
we’re really going to fight!” he said. His voice was happy and
excited. “And we’re going to beat them! I’m sure we’re going to
win!” He became more serious. “They’ve beaten us every time
until now, but this time, we’ll win!”
“But you think this march is stupid, don’t you?” asked the
young soldier.
“No” explained the other man. “I’m happy to march if we
 fight at the end. But I hate moving around for no reason. And
we’re tired and the food is bad!”
“Jim says we’re going to fight this time,” said the young
soldier.
“He’s right,” said the loud soldier. His voice grew excited
again and he jumped to his feet. “And we’re going to win, I’m
sure!” He spoke like an old soldier.
The young soldier looked at him coldly. “Oh. you’re going to
do great things, I guess!”
“Oh, I don’t know. Hut I’ll fight as well as other men!” replied
the loud soldier.
“How do you know that you won’t run away?” asked the young
soldier.
“Run away? Me? Of course not!”
The young soldier continued,” But you’re not the bravest man
in the world, are you?”
“I didn’t say that!” The loud soldier was angry. “And who are
you? Why did you ask me a question like that?” He walked
away, leaving Henry alone again.
Henry slowly returned to his tent and lay down next to the
sleeping tall soldier. He stayed awake for a long time. He asked
himself the same painful questions again and again: “Will I be
brave? Or will I run away?” At last, he fell into a deep sleep.
Chapter  
“When are we going to fight?”
The new regiment marched all the next day. They crossed a
bridge over the river, and then they camped near a forest. The
young soldier was afraid of the forest.” Maybe the enemy’s
hiding there!” he thought. “Maybe they’re going to attack us in
the dark!” He watched the forest carefully, but he saw nothing.
Early the next morning, they followed a narrow road into the
forest. They marched for hours without stopping.
 Early the next morning, they followed a narrow road into the
forest“I’m tired!” said the loud soldier unhappily.” And my feet
hurt!”
“My bag’s too heavy,” said the tall soldier. “I’m going to leave
it here.” He put it down by the side of the road.
The other soldiers did the same. They left everything that they
didn’t need. Each man kept only his clothes, bed cover, food,
water, rifle, and bullets. “You can eat and shoot now,” said the
tall soldier. “That’s all that you need to do.”
The new regiment could now move more quickly, like the older
regiments. They still looked like a new regiment, though. Their
uniforms were still new, and the colors of their flag were still
bright.
Finally, the army sat down to rest. “This isn’t a real war. We’re
just practicing,” thought Henry. “We’re just marching and
marching. When are we going to fight?”
Then, one gray morning, the army began to run. The young
soldier was not really awake, but he had to run with his
comrades. He was afraid of falling. “The others will run over
me!” he thought. He was carried along by the crowd. For a
second he felt as weak as a baby. The skin that covered his heart
seemed very thin.
He took the time to look around him. He could not stop and he
could not escape from the regiment. It was all around him. The
laws and the history of his country were on four sides. He was in
a moving box. He felt very afraid.” I never wanted to fight in the
war,” he told himself. “The government brought me here. And
now I’m going to die!”
The regiment crossed a little stream. Suddenly, the young
soldier heard the sound of cannon fire in front of him. He forgot
his fear and ran faster. He only wanted to sec the fighting. His
heart was beating very quickly as he climbed up a hill.
He was surprised when he looked down. There wasn’t a big
battlefield. There were some small green fields with trees all
around them. Small groups of soldiers were running through the
 trees and firing their rifles. A dark battle line of soldiers lay on
the grass. A flag waved brightly.
The regiment formed into a battle line and began to move
toward the woods. Henry watched the soldiers who were tiring
busily. “What are they firing at?” he asked himself. “I can’t see
anything.”
Just then, he saw a dead soldier lying on the ground. He wore
broken shoes and an old brown uniform that was too big for him.
The young soldier looked into his face with great interest. “He
fought and he died,” he thought. “He knows what it’s like. But he
can’t tell me.”
After that, he didn’t want to see the battle. When he was
running up the hill, he was ready to fight. Now he had time to
think. He was afraid again. His back felt cold and his legs felt
weak. He saw danger all around him. The shadows in the woods
looked like enemy soldiers. “We can’t go in there!” he told
himself. “They’ll kill us all!”
He looked at his comrades. They were walking calmly through
fields and woods. Their faces showed interest but not fear. They
wanted to sec their first battle.
The young soldier wanted to shout at them, “Stop! Go back!
We’re all going to die! Don’t you understand?” He opened his
mouth, but he couldn’t make a sound. He was too afraid.”
They’ll laugh at me if I tell them to go back,” he thought. “They
won’t understand. They’re too stupid. I’m the only one who
understands. And nobody will believe me.”
He felt very sorry for himself. He walked slowly, with his head
down. A young officer saw him. and started beating him on the
shoulder with his sword. “Hurry, young man!” he said in a loud
voice. “Hurry!”
The young soldier walked faster, but he kept his head down. He
hated the young officer.” He doesn’t understand me!” he told
himself angrily. “Stupid animal!”
  The regiment continued marching. After some time, they
stopped in a large, open space in a forest. They could still hear
the sound of rifle fire. They could see little balls of white smoke
from the rifles.
Many men in the regiment began to build little hills in front of
them, using earth, stones, and sticks. They wanted to protect
themselves against the enemy bullets. But then the regiment was
ordered to move. The young soldier was very surprised. “Why
did we come here?” he asked the tall soldier. “Why are we
leaving so soon?”
“I’m sure there’s a good reason,” replied the call soldier
patiently.
They moved to a new position, and they built more little hills.
Then they moved again. And again. The loud soldier was angry.
“When are we going to fight?” he cried. “What’s the purpose of
all this marching? Those generals are stupid!”
Now the tall soldier was angry.” Be quiet!” he shouted.
“You’re not a general!”
“I just want to fight” explained the loud soldier. “I didn’t come
here to walk!”
The regiment marched into the forest. Henry began to worry
again. “Will I be brave, or will I run away?” he asked himself. He
thought about dying, and a new idea came to him.” If I die, I’ll be
able to rest.” He began to feel less afraid.
Just then, he heard the sound of cannon fire. He saw a group of
soldiers running and firing. He heard the sound of their rifles.
The regiment on his right was standing and firing all together. He
watched them through a cloud of smoke. The noise grew louder.
Suddenly, he felt a heavy hand on his shoulder. It was the loud
soldier. “It’s my first and last battle,” he said sadly. “I’m sure
that I’m going to die.” He had tears in his eyes and his hands
were shaking. He gave the young soldier a small package in a
yellow
  envelope, “There are some letters inside. I want you to give them
to my family.”
“What do you mean?” cried Henry. But there was no reply. The
other soldier walked away.
Chapter   “They’re coming!”
Henry’s regiment stopped outside a wood. Through the trees,
they could see some open fields and a thick cloud of smoke. In
the smoke they could see a line of men running toward them. A
team of horses ran with the men, pulling cannon on wheels.
A shell screamed over their heads and landed in the woods near
them. A cloud of brown earth flew up into the air and showered
down on them. Bullets hit the trees where they were hiding. The
soldiers stayed very close to the ground.
They heard a loud cry of pain. A young officer was shot in the
hand. Another officer covered his wound with a clean piece of
cloth.
Far away, the battle flag was falling, and there was smoke and
fire all around. Men in blue came out of the smoke, running like
wild horses. More and more men ran toward the regiment,
shouting. Their voices mixed with the sound of the bullets and
the shells. As they came closer, the older regiments began to
laugh at them. “What’s the matter? What are you afraid of?” they
called. “Are you trying to hide?”
Officers on horseback were beating them with their swords and
kicking them. “Stop! Go back!” they cried. The running men
didn’t see or hear them.
Henry saw the fear on their faces. He wanted to run, but he
couldn’t. His legs refused to move. “What are they running
from?” he asked himself. “I want to see it. But when I see it,
maybe I’ll run too!”
  The young soldier only had to wait for a few minutes.
“They’re coming!” cried a voice.
The men checked their rifles. Henry had a terrible thought: “Is
there a bullet in my rifle?”
A general stopped his horse near another officer on horseback.
”You have to stop them!” he shouted angrily.
“Yes, General” the officer replied nervously. “We’ll try!”
The man next to the young soldier was talking to himself: “Oh,
no, we’re in trouble now!”
A young officer stood at the back of the regiment. ”Don’t fire,
boys! Wait until I tell you! Wait until they come close!”
Suddenly a crowd of enemy soldiers came running across the
field, shouting wildly The young soldier didn’t have time to
think. He threw his rifle into position and fired a first wild shot.
He immediately began to work like a machine. He put in another
bullet. He fired his rifle, again and again. He suddenly forgot
about himself. He was part of the regiment and part of the army.
His country was in danger, and he had to protect it.
He knew that his comrades were all around him. They were all
brothers, fighting the same enemy. They all faced the danger of
death. He could see them through the smoke. They reached down
to get another bullet. Then they stood up to fire. He could hear
the sound of metal on metal as they put in the bullets. The rifles
made a loud crashing noise. Strange sounds came from the
soldiers’ mouths. Some shouted and some sang. Some made
noises like wild animals. The tall soldier cursed.
The officers stayed behind the soldiers, shouting orders. They
watched the enemy through the thick smoke. A man dropped his
rifle. He ran away screaming. An officer stopped him and began
hitting him. He pushed him back toward the line. The man
looked at the officer with the eyes of a beaten dog. He tried to put
a bullet into his rifle, but his hands were shaking. The officer
helped him.
  He fought against the enemy soldiers.The young soldier’s mouth was dry and his eyes felt like hot
stones. The noise of the guns filled his ears and the smoke burned
his nose. He fought against the pain and the smoke while he
fought against the enemy soldiers. He was angry with his rifle,
because it fired only one bullet at a time. He wanted to run
forward and kill everyone.
The man next to him fell to the ground. Blood poured from his
chest. A bullet touched one soldier on the side of his head. He
dropped his rifle and held his head in his hands. Then he ran.
Another man had a bullet in his knee. He sat against a tree,
crying, “Help me, help me!” The young officer was killed early
in the battle. He lay on the ground like a tired man, but there was
a surprised look on his face.
The young soldier heard loud shouting along the line. The blue
soldiers stopped firing. As the smoke slowly cleared, he saw
small groups of men in brown running away. One man turned
around to fire a last shot. Then he disappeared into the smoke.
Some of the men began to shout happily Many others were
silent, thinking. The young soldier felt hot and dirty, and very
thirsty. He sat down, and took a long drink of warm water. He
heard excited voices around him: “We did it! We stopped them!”
He looked around, happy to be alive. Dead men were lying on
the ground where they fell. Their arms and legs were in strange
positions. A line of wounded men walked slowly past him.
Suddenly, he heard a loud crash behind him. He saw a line of
camion and busy soldiers. They were firing shells over his head
into the enemy lines. He heard shouts and rifle fire coming from
a hillside. He saw flags waving in the smoke, and he felt proud.
“Our boys are still fighting!” he thought. Then he looked up. The
sky was blue, and the sun was shining on the trees and fields.
“It’s so beautiful here.” he thought, “even when there’s a war.”
  Chapter  
“They’re coming again!”
The young soldier stood up slowly. “It’s finished!” he said to
himself happily. “The battle is finished! And I’m a real soldier
now.” He was very proud of himself. He smiled at his comrades.
“It’s hot, isn’t it?” he said.
“You’re right! It’s too hot for fighting!” was the reply.
He shook hands and spoke with the other soldiers. After the
battle, they were all his friends and his brothers.
Just then, he heard cries of surprise along the line. “They’re
coming again!”
A crowd of enemy soldiers ran out of the woods. The shells
flew over their heads again, and broke into pieces in the grass.
They looked like strange war flowers.
The tired regiment slowly moved into position. “No! Not
again!” one man cried. ”We’re too tired!”
Henry looked at the running men. “Who are they? Are they
men or machines?” he asked himself. He slowly lifted his rifle
and fired it into the crowded field. He looked again through the
smoke. More and more soldiers were running toward him.
shouting loudly.” They’re too strong for us! We can’t beat
them!” he thought. He closed his eyes, waited and listened.
A soldier near him stopped firing. He threw down his rifle and
ran away screaming. One after another, the soldiers dropped their
rifles and ran. The young soldier opened his eyes. He was alone.
He turned his head and saw his comrades disappearing into the
smoke. He was lost. He didn’t know which way to run. There
was danger on all sides. Suddenly, he began to run away from the
battlefield. He dropped his rifle. His open coat flew in the wind.
He passed a young officer. “Stop! Go back!” the officer cried. He
hit a running man with his sword, but the man ran faster. The
young soldier ran without seeing. Two or three times he
  The young soldier run without seeing.fell down. Once he knocked his shoulder heavily against a tree.
He could still hear gunfire. He felt more and more afraid because
he couldn’t see the battle. When he was fighting, he was facing
the enemy. Now the enemy was behind him and he imagined a
bullet in his back.
He noticed that he wasn’t alone. There were running men on
his right and on his left, and he heard footsteps behind him. All
the regiment was running away. The crashing sounds of battle
followed them. Henry was glad that there were men behind him.
He knew that the danger was behind them. “They’ll die first,”
he told himself. “If I stay at the front, I’ll be safe.” He ran faster
and stayed at the front or the group.
The young soldier ran across a little field, followed by his
comrades. Shells flew over their heads, screaming. One landed
near him and knocked him to the ground. He wasn’t hurt. He
jumped up and continued running. He was surprised to see a line
of six cannon. Soldiers were firing shells at the enemy position.
They fired and fired again like machines. Henry felt sorry for
them. He wanted to shout at them, “Run! The enemy’s coming!”
lint he said nothing, and continued running. He knew that they
were dead men.
He climbed a little hill. Far away, he saw a bright flag waving.
A regiment was running to help its comrades. “What kind of men
are they?” he asked himself. “They’re running toward their death.
I guess they’re heroes.” Another thought came to him: “Maybe
they just don’t understand. Maybe they’re stupid!”
“The noise ot the battle was now far away. The young soldier
ran more slowly. He saw a general on horseback. The general
and the horse were standing quietly, watching the battle. He came
closer. He wanted to speak to the general. He wanted to say,
“We’re lost the battle! Don’t stay here!” He was angry with the
general, sitting calmly on his horse. “He’s doing nothing!” he
thought.
Just then, the general spoke excitedly. “They’ve stopped
them!
  We’ll beat them now!” He gave a quick order to an officer on
horseback, and the officer rode away. The general smiled on the
earth like a sun. He happily repeated the same words, “They’ve
stopped them!”
Hearing this, the young soldier hid his face in his hands. He
felt like a criminal. He looked back through the trees. He heard
gunfire and shouting as the blue soldiers attacked. Then he
became angry. ”We won!” he thought. “But I did the right thing!
The enemy was winning, and I saved myself. The army needs me
alive, so I stayed alive. They can’t right with dead soldiers. I was
right to run away”
He thought about his comrades who staved on the battlefield.
“They were wrong to stay. They didn’t understand the danger.
They’re all stupid!” But he couldn’t forget that they won the
battle. Now they were heroes.   le hated his comrades, and the
war.
“What can I do?” he asked himself. “I can’t go back to the
camp. They’ll punish me because I ran away They won’t
understand that I did the right thing. They’re all too stupid!”
The young soldier went into a thick wood, away from the
sound of gunfire. Soon he heard only his footsteps, and birds
singing.
He threw a stone at a bird, and the bird flew up into a tall tree.
“That bird is like me,” he thought. “It saved itself. It’s the natural
thing to do. So I did the right thing when I saved myself.”
It was quiet and green in the wood, and Henry felt calmer. He
came into an open space where the sun was shining through the
trees. Suddenly, he stopped and screamed. A dead soldier was
sitting with his back against a tree. He was wearing a dirty
uniform. It was blue when it was new. But now it was a sad
green color. Flies circled around the head and walked on the gray
face. The mouth was open. The eyes were the color of a dead
fish. “He’s looking at me!” thought the young soldier in fear. He
slowly walked away still watching. He became more and more
afraid.
  Suddenly, he ran. He ran for a long time, looking behind him.
“Is that a voice? Are those footsteps?” he asked himself. But the
only sound was the wind in the trees.
Chapter  
“Where’s your wound?”
The sun was low in the sky, and the forest was silent. Suddenly,
there was a loud crash of cannon fire. Hundreds of rifles began
filing. Henry listened, then ran toward the battle. He was
surprised at himself First, he ran away from a battle. Now he was
running toward it.
He pushed forward through the thick forest until he reached an
open space. From there he could see long gray walls of smoke
oyer the battle lines. The sounds of cannon shook him. The rifle
fire rang in his ears. He stood and watched, his eyes wide and his
mouth open.
“This sounds like a real battle.” he thought. “I’ve only seen
little fights.” He laughed at himself and his comrades. “We
thought that we were winning the war. We thought we were
heroes. But nobody knows our names. Nobody knows what we
did. Nobody will read about us in the newspapers. And we
thought it was so serious!”
He continued moving forward. The battle was like a big.
terrible machine. He moved even closer to it. He wanted to see
dead bodies. He climbed over a low stone wall. On the other side,
the ground was covered with clothes and rifles. A dead soldier
lay with his face hidden in his arm. Four or five others lay close
together. A hot sun shone on them. ”I don’t belong here,”
thought the young soldier. “This place belongs to them.”
He imagined the voices of the dead men. “Go away! Leave us
alone!” He hurried past, looking behind him.
He finally came to a road. He could hear shouting now. mixed
  with gunfire. Far away; he could see many dark soldiers fighting
in a cloud of smoke.
A line of wounded men was coming toward him, away from
the battle. They walked slowly and painfully. They were crying
and cursing. One man had a shoe that was full of blood. He was
laughing crazily. A man with a broken arm helped him to walk.
A gray-faced soldier walked forward like a machine. He was
looking at something far away. His hands were pressed against
his wounded side. They were covered in blood.
Two soldiers were carrying a wounded officer. “Be careful!” he
said angrily. “You’re hurting my leg!” He shouted at the crowd
of men on foot. “Move out of the way!” The wounded men
cursed him quietly as they moved to the sides of the road. One of
the soldiers knocked heavily into the gray-faced soldier as they
passed.
Men on horseback rode through the line, carrying messages.
Officers shouted, “Clear the way!” Teams of horses pulling
cannon pushed the wounded men of the road. There were loud
cries of pain and anger from all sides.
The young soldier joined the line of wounded men. A small,
thin man walked silently in front of him. He was listening to a
tall soldier with a beard. The tall soldier was telling the story of
the last great battle. The thin man listened to every word. His
eyes were wide and his mouth hung open.
The bearded man looked at the thin man and laughed. “Shut
your mouth, boy!” he said loudly. “Or you’ll catch flies!” The
other soldiers laughed.
The thin man moved back beside Henry. His face was red. He
looked at Henry shyly, but did not speak. His eyes asked the
young soldier to be his friend. He was dirty from head to foot,
and there was blood on his uniform. On his head was an old
piece of cloth covered in blood. A broken arm hung at his side.
Finally, he spoke in a soft voice. “It was a good fight, wasn’t it?”
  Henry’s mind was far away. “Yes.” he said impatiently. He
walked faster
The thin man tried to follow him. He wanted to talk to
someone. He continued shyly: “Yes, sir! That’s the best light I’ve
ever seen. Those boys didn’t run when they heard the guns. No.
sir! They stayed and fought! You can’t beat those boys!” He
smiled at Henry, but Henry said nothing. After a time, he spoke
again. “Where were you hit?” Henry just looked at him. He
didn’t understand.
“Where were you shot?” he repeated. ”Where’s your wound?”
The young soldier didn’t answer. “I-I ...” His face was red and he
looked nervously around him. He turned away suddenly and
disappeared into the crowd. The thin man looked after him in
surprise.
The young soldier moved back until he couldn’t see the thin
man. Then he started to walk in line with the others. There were
wounds all around him. He thought about the thin man’s question
and he began to worry. He looked at the other soldiers. “They’re
all looking at me.” he thought. “They know my secret. They can
see that I’m not hurt.” He began to feel angry. “Everyone thinks
they’re brave. But they’re only wounded! They’re lucky!” He too
wanted a wound, a red badge of courage.
Then he looked at the gray-faced soldier walking at his side. He
suddenly felt bad. “He has a real wound,” he said to himself. “I
don’t belong here.”
There were soldiers all around the gray-faced soldier. They
spoke to him. but he didn’t reply. He walked straight on, looking
at something far away. They tried to help him. but he waved
them away with his hand. The young soldier looked at the hand
again. He gave a cry of surprise. He ran forward on legs that
suddenly felt weak. He took the gray-faced soldier by the arm.
“Jim!” he screamed.
The tall soldier gave a little smile. “Hello. Henry,” he said.
  He started to walk in line with the others. There were
wounds all around him.Henry didn’t know what to say. ”Oh, Jim! Oh. Jim!’” he
repeated.
The tall soldier held out his hand. It was covered in old. black
blood and new, red blood. “Where have you been, Henry?” he
asked. “I was worried. I thought that you were dead.”
Henry felt worse and worse. “Oh, Jim!” he said again.
The tall soldier continued, “You know, I was out there. It was a
terrible fight. And they shot me” He looked surprised. “That’s
right. They shot me.” He shook his head slowly.
Chapter  
“Leave me alone!”
The other soldiers left Henry alone with his friend. They all had
wounds. Suddenly, the young soldier saw a look of fear on Jim’s
face. The tall soldier held his arm tightly. He spoke in a shaking
voice. “I’m afraid, Henry. I’m afraid that I’ll fall. And if I fall,
the cannon will run over me! Help me, Henry! Please!”
“I’ll look after you, Jim!” he cried. There were tears in his
eyes.
“I’ve always been a good friend, haven’t I?” asked the tall
soldier. “You’ll help me, won’t you? Just pull me out of the way,
that’s all.” He waited for a reply. Henry made a sign with his
head. He was crying now.
But then the tall soldier dropped Henrys arm. He seemed to
forget all his fears. He walked carefully along the middle of the
road. Henry ran to help him. ”No, no. leave me alone,” he said in
a weak voice. He was looking at a faraway place. Henry
followed, wanting to help.
Soon he heard a voice behind him. Turning around, he saw the
thin man. “Take him off” the road, my friend,” he said softly.
“The cannon are coming, and they’re coming last. He’s going to
die. You know that, don’t you?”
“Jim! Jim!” cried the young soldier, running forward. ”Come
with me!”
  The tall soldier looked at him, not understanding. Then he
seemed to wake up. ”Oh! Into the fields?” He walked into the
grass.
Henry turned around as the horses passed with the cannon.
Then he heard a loud cry from the thin man, “Look! He’s
running!”
The tall soldier was running across the field, almost falling.
Henry felt a sharp pain in his heart as he watched him. He and
the thin man began to run after the tall soldier. It was a strange
race.
“Where are you going, Jim? Stop! You’ll hurt yourself!” called
the young soldier. “Jim!”
The tall soldier stopped and turned around. His eyes were sad.
“Leave me alone!” he said quietly. “Please!” He continued on his
way, almost falling again. The two soldiers followed, watching.
At last, they saw him stop. His face was calm. He was in the
place that he was looking for. He stood with his arms at his sides.
He was waiting for something to happen. Suddenly, his chest
began to move in and out as he tried to take in some air. His
chest moved faster and faster. With every movement, the young
soldier felt the tall soldier’s pain.
“Jim!” he cried.
The tall soldier spoke one last time. “Leave—me—alone!
Don’t—touch me!”
He stood up very straight and his arms shook. Then his legs
began a terrible dance. Then his body fell forward. His shoulder
hit the ground, and he stopped moving. As his coat fell open, the
young soldier saw the terrible wound in his side. He turned away,
suddenly angry. He looked toward the battlefield and cursed. The
sun was red and angry in the sky.
The thin man stood looking at the body of the tall soldier. “He
was a strong man, wasn’t he?” he said.” I never saw a man die
like that”
The young soldier wasn’t listening. He sat on the ground with
his face in his hands. He couldn’t speak.
  “We have to leave him here and go.“The thin man continued: “Listen to me, my friend.” He was
still looking at the body. “He’s gone, isn’t he? He’s finished. But
we’re still here. We have to leave him here and go.” He was quiet
for a minute. ”And I’m not in very good health,” he added softly.
The young soldier jumped up. “Not you too!” he cried. “You’re
not going too!”
The thin man waved his hand. ”No, no, of course not. I just
want some soup and a good bed. Then I’ll be all right again.
Now let’s go!” They looked at the body one more time. then
turned away.
They walked silently back onto the road. After some time, the
thin man spoke again. “I’m feeling bad now, really bad.” His
legs were shaking and his skin looked blue.
“Oh, no!” cried the young soldier. He imagined another
meeting with death.
His comrade waved his hand again. ”I’m not going to die yet,”
he said. “I can’t die. I have too many children and they all need
me.” He gave a little smile. Henry understood that he was joking.
“And when I die,” he added, “I won’t die like that other soldier.
I’ll just lie down on the ground.”
Henry walked faster, but the other man stayed beside him.
“I know a man named Tom.” the thin man continued. “He lives
next door to me at home. We’re good friends. Well, we were
fighting this afternoon. He started shouting and cursing at me.
‘”Look!’ he shouted. ’You’re wounded in the head!’
“I touched my head. He was right. There was blood on my
hand. I started running, but just then another bullet hit me in the
arm. It turned me right around. So that’s why I’m here. It’s
because of my friend Tom.”
He was quiet for some time, then he spoke again. ”I can’t walk
much longer. It hurts too much.” He looked at Henry. “You
know, you look tired. You should look after yourself. Maybe
your wound is getting worse. Maybe it’s inside your body.
They’re the worst. Where is it?” He didn’t wait for an answer.
  “  had another friend named John,” continued the thin man.
“He had a wound in the head.
‘”Are yon all right, John? everyone asked him.
“”Yes, I’m fine,’ he said. It’s nothing.’
“And the next minute he was as dead as a stone. So you should
be careful of your wound. Maybe it’s worse than you think. Now
tell me, where is it?”
The young soldier didn’t want to talk about wounds. “Leave
me alone!” he said coldly.
The thin man looked at him sadly. “What’s wrong? I didn’t do
anything.”
Henry hated the thin man. ”He’s trying to learn my secret!” he
thought. “Goodbye!” he said in a hard voice.
“Where are you going, my friend?” asked the thin man. His
voice was weak. “Don’t go away. You’re hurt. I’ll look after you.
Just tell me one thing. Where’s your wound?” He walked into the
Held, talking to himself.
The young soldier quickly walked away. The thin man’s
question hurt him too much. “I can’t keep my secret,” he thought.
“Everyone will know about my crime, and they’ll punish me. I
want to die. Then I’ll be free.”
Chapter  
“Don’t try to stop me!”
The battle sounds were growing louder. The young soldier went
around a little hill. The road was blocked with horses and
cannon. They were leaving the battlefield. Men were pulling at
the horses’ heads and hitting them with sticks. A cannon with a
broken wheel lay on its side. He heard shouted orders and curses.
There was fear everywhere.
The young soldier was strangely pleased. “They’re all running
away from the battle. They’re smart, like me. I did the right thing
  when I ran away.” He sat down to watch. He saw a line of foot
soldiers marching quickly toward the battle. The men at the front
used their rifles to push through the crowd. The others followed.
“Move out of the way!” cried the officers importantly. They were
marching proudly, with their heads high. They were going into
the heart of the battle.
The young soldier watched them pass. His old fears returned.
“Look at them! Where do they find their courage? They’re
heroes. I’ll never be like them, They’re marching straight on to
their death, and they re not scared. And I’m scared of
everything!” He wanted to change places with one of these
heroes. A beautiful picture came into his mind, like a dream. He
closed his eyes. He was holding a broken sword high in the air.
He gave the order to attack. His comrades followed him,
shouting excitedly. He stood alone against the enemy. All eyes
were watching as he died for his country. He was a hero.
Henry opened his eyes and jumped to his feet. He was ready to
fight again. His country needed him. But then he suddenly felt a
little less brave. “How can   fight?” he asked himself. “I don’t
have a rifle. I can’t fight with my hands. And I don’t know where
my regiment is.” He thought about his regiment. “  can’t go
back.” he told himself. “They’ll ask too many questions!” He
found a new reason. ”And I’m sick!” His mouth was burning
and his head was on fire. His eyes hurt. His stomach was empty
and aching. He began to hate himself because he was weak. “I’ll
never be a hero!” he thought.
A new idea came to him. “If we lose this battle, even the brave
men will run away. Nobody will know that I wasn’t brave. Or
they’ll think that I was smart to run away.” He thought again. No,
he didn’t want the blue army to lose. It was a selfish idea.
He had to return to his regiment, hut he was afraid. “What will
they say?” he asked himself. He had to think of a story. “But will
they believe me?” He was very worried.
  He imagined that he was back in the camp. Laughing men
pointed at him. “There’s Henry! He’s scared of his own shadow!
Run, Henry!” He had nowhere to hide. He was a joke.
A crash of cannon fire woke the young soldier from his bad
dream. Dark waves of men ran out of the woods and down
through the fields. They were dropping their rifles and their coats
as they ran.
Henry forgot his troubles. The fight was lost. War. the greedy
red animal, was coining nearer. It was hungry and it was ready to
cat the army. Soon, there were running men everywhere.” What’s
the matter? Where are you going?” he cried. Nobody saw him,
and nobody heard his question. He pulled at a man’s arm to stop
him. They stood face to face. He tried to speak: “Why—Why?”
The man pulled away, shouting, “Don’t try to stop me! I have to
go!” The young soldier held on more tightly. The man pulled
harder. His face was red and angry. “I have to go!” he shouted
again. He lifted his rifle above his head and hit Henry hard on the
head. Henry’s fingers became weak, and he dropped the man’s
arm. Bright lights danced in front of his eyes and cannon crashed
inside his head. The man ran away.
I le fell to his knees. Then he tried to get up, fighting against
the pain. He got onto his hands and knees. He slowly pushed
himself to his feet, like a baby trying to walk. He held his head in
his hands and walked slowly across the grass. He touched the
wound carefully. Sharp pains shot through his head. His hand
was covered in bright, red blood. He looked at it for a long time,
then he started walking again. He was afraid to move quickly
because of the pain.
He turned onto the road. A young officer on a horse almost ran
over him. More men on horseback followed quickly. Then came
the foot soldiers. Officers shouted at them as they marched in a
long line. At the end came more horses, pulling cannon behind
them. The young soldier walked carefully past them along the
side of the road.
  “Don’t try to stop me!”There were long purple shadows in the forest, and the red sun
was going down behind a cloud. The road was now empty. He
passed the bodies of horses and broken war machines. His head
felt very big, but it didn’t hurt now. He began to worry. When he
felt the pain, he could measure the danger. He knew that he was
still alive. Now he felt nothing. It was worse than the pain.
He thought about the time when he was a boy. He saw his
mother cooking in the kitchen. There was a warm light all around
her. His dinner was on the table. He remembered swimming in
the river. He was laughing with his friends. The water was fresh,
and there was a soft wind in the trees.
He grew very tired, and his head hung down. His feet were
heavy. He wanted to lie down and sleep, but he was afraid to
stop. It was getting darker.
At last, he heard a friendly voice near his shoulder. “You don’t
look very well, boy!” The young soldier didn’t look up. He tried
to speak, but his tongue was thick in his mouth. The man took
him by the arm. “I’m going the same way as you. I can help
you.” The man questioned Henry as they went along. He also
answered when the young soldier said nothing.
“What regiment are you in? The     ? They
weren’t
fighting today. They were? Everyone was fighting. I was
lost. I didn’t know where I was. How did you get here? I guess
you fought with another regiment. But well find yours. They’re a
long way from here. Don’t worry, we’ll find them.”
The friendly voice stayed with Henry. They walked through the
trees and past the guards. He felt like a child. Finally, they
stopped. The friendly man laughed. “Do you see that?” he asked.
He pointed to a fire. “That’s your regiment. Goodbye and good
luck.” He shook Henry’s hand and walked away.
“He’s gone,” thought Henry, ”and I never saw his face.”
  Chapter  
“I’ll look after you”
The young soldier walked slowly toward the fire. He was still
afraid of his comrades’ questions. He thought about hiding in the
forest, but he was too tired. Suddenly, he saw a big, black
shadow in front of him. It was pointing a rifle at him. “Stop!”
called a nervous voice.
Henry stopped in surprise. “Hello. Wilson,” he said. “You’re
here.”
The loud soldier came slowly forward. “Is that you, Henry?
You’re alive! I’m so glad to see you!”
“Yes, it’s me” said Henry. He felt weak. He had to tell his story
quickly.” I was lost and I couldn’t find the regiment. I was far
from here, on the right. There was bad fighting. It was terrible. I
was shot in the head.”
“Why didn’t you tell me?” cried his friend, “Come here. Henry.
I’ll look after you.” He put his arm around Henry’s shoulders.
They sat down next to the fire. Wilson looked at the wound in the
firelight. He touched it carefully. “That’s it,” he said. “A bullet
just touched you on the side or the head. It looks like somebody
hit you with a stick. You’ll be all right, but its going to hurt
tomorrow morning. Wait here. I’ll come back in a minute.”
Wilson left Henry by the fire. Henry looked around and saw-
soldiers lying asleep everywhere. They talked in their sleep, and
changed from one position to another. An officer was sleeping
with his back against a tree. His sword was still in his hand.
Wilson returned with water and coffee. “Here, drink this,” he
said. The coffee was cold and delicious in Henry’s mouth.
Wilson wet a cloth and tied it carefully around Henry’s head.
Henry looked at him gratefully The cloth was cold on his aching
head. “You’re a good man, Henry,” Wilson said. “Most people
scream when they’re hurt. But you didn’t make a sound.” Henry
looked
  Henry lifted his head weakly. “But this is your bed “ he said.at the ground, saying nothing. “Now lie down and sleep.” said
Wilson.
Henry lilted his head weakly. “But this is your bed.” he said.
“Where will you sleep?”
“Go to sleep!” ordered Wilson. “I’ll be all right.”
The young soldier was already asleep, sate and warm.
He woke up before the sun came up. He was cold and wet. His
comrades still slept on the ground like dead men. Wilson was
putting more wood onto the fire. “How are you feeling. Henry?”
he asked kindly. “Let’s see your head.” He lifted up the piece of
cloth.
“He careful!” said Henry sharply. ”You’re hurting me!”
“Come and have something to cat now.” said Wilson patiently.
“Then you’ll feel better.” He brought Henry some coffee, and he
quickly cooked some meat over the fire. He sat down and happily
watched Henry eat.
Henry was looking at Wilson too. “What happened to him?” he
asked himself. “ He’s changed. Before, he was angry all the time,
and he was so proud of himself. Now he’s calm. I’m glad that
he’s changed.”
Wilson was thinking about the next battle. “Do you think we’ll
beat them?” he asked Henry.
The young soldier thought for a minute, then laughed. “Two
days ago. you wanted to beat the enemy army alone!”
Wilson looked a little surprised. “Did I?” he asked. “I guess I
was stupid then. Maybe I’ve changed. The officers say we’re
beating them.”
“I don’t know about that,” the young soldier replied.
“Yesterday I thought they were beating us.” Henry suddenly
remembered something. “Jim Conklin’s dead. He was shot in the
side.”
Wilson looked at him in surprise. “No! Poor old Jim!” He-
looked silently into the fire.
  There were other small fires all around them. Groups of men
sat drinking coffee and talking. One man stood up suddenly and
dropped a cup of hot coffee. It tell on another mans knee. There
was loud shouting and cursing.
‘There’s going to be a fight!” said Wilson. “I’m going to stop
them.” He went to the angry men. “Now, boys,” he said quietly.
“Don’t fight, fight against the enemy, not against your friends!”
All three men were talking excitedly and waving their arms.
Finally, the two men sat down and Wilson came back. “I have to
tight one of them after the battle.” he said calmly. “He didn’t like
what I said.”
The young soldier laughed. “You’ve really changed,” he
said.
Wilson didn’t reply. Re was thinking. Finally, he spoke. „You
know, we lost over half the men yesterday. But they weren’t all
dead. They were lost, that’s all. They were fighting with other
regiments. Just like you.” The young soldier said nothing.
Soon the regiment was standing on the road. They were waiting
for the order to march. Henry put his hand into his pocket.
“What’s that?” he asked himself. He pulled out a yellow
envelope. Then he remembered. “Wilson’s letters,” he thought in
surprise. He almost spoke to Wilson, but he changed his mind.
He decided to wait-“Wilson was scared when he gave me those
letters,” he thought. “ I f he asks me any questions, I’ll talk about
the letters. He’ll remember his fear, then he’ll stop asking
questions.” He felt a little sorry for his friend. “Poor old Wilson,”
he thought, “crying like a baby.”
He thought about what happened the day before. He forgot his
own fears. He was really quite pleased with himself “I ran away
from the battle, but nobody knows about it,” he thought. “And I
did it for a good reason. The other men ran away because they
were afraid. I ran away because   was smart.”
He wasn’t worried about the future.” I can do the same thing
again if I have to.” he told himself. “With a little luck, nobody
  will know.” Now he felt sorry for his comrades. They didn’t
understand.
Just then, Wilson spoke. “Henry.”
“What?”
Wilson was looking at the ground. “I-I guess I’ll take back
those letters.” His face was red.
Henry slowly took the envelope out of his pocket. He wanted to
say something, because Wilson was so weak and afraid. Finally,
he decided to be kind. “Here they are, Wilson,” he said. As he
watched his friend suffer, he felt even stronger and braver.
Chapter    “They fight like cowboys!”
The young soldiers regiment stopped near a wood. They lay on
the ground behind piles of earth and waited for their turn to fight.
Some men put their heads down and slept. The sound of rifle and
cannon fire was everywhere, but they couldn’t see the battle
through the trees. The men were unhappy. “What are we waiting
for? Why don’t we do something?” they asked.
The noise got louder, then stopped. The men called, “What’s
happening?”
Answers came from all sides. “We’re losing! They’re bearing
us!” The rifle fire grew louder. Soon they were marching away
from the woods. They heard the enemy behind them, shouting.
Henry was angry. “Why are we going back?” he asked loudly.
“We were fighting well, and now they’re telling us to leave.
Those generals are stupid.”
His friend replied sadly, “We’re going back because they beat
us. It’s just bad luck.”
The young soldier continued: “But it’s not fair! We fight as
hard as we can” Henry suddenly felt surprised. ”Did I say that?”
he asked himself. He looked around him nervously. The other
  men weren’t listening. This gave him the courage to continue. He
repeated something that he heard that morning. “The general says
that we’re the best new regiment. So it” we lose, we can’t help
it.”
“I guess so,” his friend agreed. “Our boys try hard.”
“That’s right!” said Henry. “We’re not losing because of them.
We’re losing because of those stupid generals! They don’t know
what they’re doing. We fight hard every time, but we cant win.”
A man spoke beside him. “What do you know ? Were you the
only one who was fighting yesterday?”
The question was like a knife in his heart. “No,” he said
quickly. “Of course not”
Henry stopped talking. He looked at the other men. “They
stayed and fought,” he thought. “Do they know that I ran away?”
He walked along silently.
They heard firing behind them. Sometimes it seemed close. and
then it was tar away again. I he men looked behind them angrily.
Finally, the regiment stopped in an open space between the trees.
The men formed into battle lines and turned to face the enemy.
As the sound of rifles became louder, the sun came up.
“I knew it!” said an officer angrily. “They waited until the sun
came up! Now they’re going to attack!” He stood behind his men
and pulled at his mustache.
A line of cannon tired shells toward the enemy. The regiment
lay on the ground and watched the shadows in the woods.
“I’m tired of this!’ said the young soldier angrily “We march
from one place to another. We don’t know where we’re going.
We light hard but they beat us. Why did we come here? Nobody
knows. And now we have to fight again.”
Wilson looked tired, but he answered his friend calmly. “Don’t
worry. Everything will be all right.”
“Don’t tell me that!” replied the young soldier. “I know ...”
A loud voice spoke behind him. “There’s too much talking
  and not enough fighting in this war!” It was an officer, and he
was angry.
The noises of battle were coming nearer. One rifle fired at the
regiment, then many more. Cannon fire crashed behind them.
More cannon answered in front of them. The tired men lay
waiting for the attack. There was no escape. The shouts of the
enemy became louder. The men turned and waited.
Henry was angry again. “Why don’t they leave us alone? Don’t
they ever get tired?” He needed to rest and to think. He hated the
enemy army.
The regiment fired, all together. A thick wall of smoke blocked
their view. Their rifle fire cut through it like knives.
Henry spoke into his friend’s ear. “Why are they following us?
If they continue, we’ll kill them all. Don’t they know that?”
His friend had a different idea. “If they continue, they’ll push
us into the river!”
When he heard this, the young soldier gave an angry shout. He
waited behind a little tree. His eyes burned with hate for the
enemy. He showed his teeth like a dog.
The enemy fired again. The regiment replied. The young
soldier quickly tired from behind the tree. He fired again. “I’m
not going to move,” he promised himself His rifle became hot,
but he continued firing. Smoke burned his eyes. He gave an
angry cry every time he fired. When the enemy moved back, he
moved forward immediately. When the enemy pushed them
back, he moved back slowly and angrily.
He was still firing when the others stopped. He was lost in his
feeling of hate for the enemy. He put down his rifle when he
heard, “What’s he shooting at? There’s nobody there!” His
comrades were looking at him in surprise. He looked at the
empty field in front of him. “Oh” he said, understanding. He lay-
on the ground beside his comrades. The battle sounds were still
in his ears.
  An officer oiled to the young soldier, “Good work! Give me ten
thousand more like you. and I’ll win the war in a week!” He
looked very pleased with himself.
When Henry’s comrades heard this, they looked at him
differently.” I didn’t know he could tight like that!” they said.
Henry lay on the ground to rest and he thought about the battle.
He was proud of himself. “I fought like a hero.” he told himself.
“And it was easy!” He was pleased that his comrades were
watching him.
He listened to the men talking. “The enemy lost a lot of men,
didn’t they?”
“That’s right. And we haven’t finished yet! The army will
never see another new regiment like us!”
The regiment rested for a time, but the battle continued around
them. The men were hot and thirsty. Wilson and Henry went to
find some water. As they were returning, they could see the
battlefield. On one side, they saw a line of guns in a gray cloud
of smoke and fire. On the other side, a long line of soldiers
followed a road. Shells passed over their heads, and bullets hit
the trees. Wounded men moved slowly through the trees.
A general and another officer on horseback passed the two
friends. They listened closely for any news. The general spoke
first. “The enemy’s going to attack. We have to stop them. We
have to attack first. I need more men. Which regiment can you
give me?”
The officer thought for a minute. “The    th are fighting with the
   th ,” he replied. “But you can have the     th . I don’t need them.
They’re not very good. They fight like cowboys!”
Henry looked at Wilson in surprise. “The     th !” he said.
“That’s us! And he called us ‘cowboys!’ What does he mean?”
The general spoke again: “Get them ready I’ll send you the
order” He began to ride away, then he turned back. “I don’t
believe that many of your cowboys will return “
  “They fight like cowboys!”Chapter   
“Give it to me!”
The two friends ran back to the lines. An officer stopped them.
“Where have you been?” he asked angrily. He stopped talking
when he saw their excited faces.
“We’re going to attack!” shouted the young soldier.
“Attack!” said the officer in surprise. ”That’s real lighting!” He
smiled proudly.
The other soldiers stood in a circle around the two friends. “Is
it true? Are we going to attack?”
“Yes! It’s true!” replied the young soldier. “We heard the
general talking!” A few minutes later, the order arrived. The
officers quickly pushed the men into line. The regiment stood
ready, watching the woods. They could hear the two armies
battling all around them.
The young soldier looked at his friend. He thought of the
general’s words: “not many of your cowboys will return.”
They were the only ones who knew this secret. The man beside
them spoke in a low voice. “They’re going to eat us!” The two
friends silently agreed, but their faces showed no fear.
The young soldier watched the woods carefully. From the
corner of his eye. he saw an officer on horseback. He was waving
his hat. The regiment pushed forward and shouted, then began to
run. The young soldier ran like a man followed by wild dogs. His
eyes were red, and his face was hard. His uniform was dirty. On
his head he wore a blood-covered cloth. His rifle hit his shoulder
as he ran. He looked like a madman.
As the regiment moved into an open space, the shooting
started. Yellow fire shot out from the trees. The men broke into
small groups as they ran into the woods. The enemy shouted as
they fired. Shells passed through the trees over their heads. One
landed in a group of men and broke into bright red pieces. One of
the men threw up his hands to protect his eyes. Other men
  were hit by bullets. They fell to the ground, screaming. The
regiment left them behind. They forgot the danger as they ran
madly forward. They shouted their hate at the enemy.
Soon they became tired and they began to run more slowly
Then the regiment stopped and stood with their rifles in their
hands. They watched their comrades dying all around them. They
watched the enemy stupidly. An officer screamed, “You can’t
stay here! Move!” He stood with his back to the enemy and
cursed them.
The young soldier fell to his knees and fired an angry shot. His
comrades woke up and began firing again. They moved carefully
from tree to tree. The smoke was thick in the wood. The gunfire
became louder as they moved forward.
They slowed down again before an open space. An officer took
Henry by the arm. “Move!’” he shouted in his ear. “We’ll be
killed if we stay!” He pulled him forward. Henry shook off the
officer’s hand.
“You come too!” he shouted back at the officer.
Wilson ran after them. The three men shouted together to the
others, “Move! Move!” A soldier ran past them carrying the flag.
The regiment followed. They ran with their heads low. They ran
into the bullets and the yellow fire. They ran on through thick
blue smoke. The noise of the firing filled their heads.
Henry ran with his eyes almost closed. He followed the bright
colors of the flag. He loved the flag. He felt proud to fight for it.
Suddenly, a bullet hit the soldier who was carrying it. He fell to
the ground. Henry and Wilson jumped forward at the same time.
They pulled the flag from his dying hands.
The two young soldiers looked behind them, holding the flag.
A few men were still shooting. They were facing the enemy, but
moving away from the battle. An officer’s voice screamed above
the noise: „Where are you going? Shoot them!”
The young soldier and his friend both pulled at the flag.
“Give it to me!”
  Henry pulled the flag out of Wilson’s hands.‘”No, let me keep it!”
Henry pulled the flag out of Wilson s hands.
The regiment moved back through the trees to an open space.
Rifle fire was coming at them from all sides. The tired men
moved more and more slowly. They wanted to give up the fight.
It was not possible to win.
The young soldier was angry and unhappy. He thought about
the general who called his comrades “cowboys.” “I wanted to
prove to him that we’re good fighters” he thought. “And now
we’ve lost!” He hated the general, and he wanted him to die. He
held the flag higher. He shouted at his comrades, and pushed
them with his free hand. He and the officer called them by name,
but they didn’t listen. The regiment was a broken machine.
Suddenly, the smoke lifted, and they saw the enemy all around
them. The men cried out in fear. They didn’t know which way to
run. Henry stood in the middle of the crowd, holding the flag. His
friend came to him. “I guess this is goodbye, Henry,” he said in a
low voice.
“Oh. be quiet!” replied the young soldier. He didn’t look at
Wilson.
The officers tried to move the men into a circle. A young
officer stood holding his sword. He was watching the woods
closely. He gave a loud shout. “They’re coming!” The regiment
fired. They could see the faces of the enemy soldiers. They wore
light gray uniforms. Bach side angrily returned the other’s rifle
fire. The smoke grew thicker, but they continued firing.
The gray soldiers came closer. “There’s no hope for us,”
thought Henry sadly. He dropped to the ground and sat with the
flag between his knees. He watched his comrades fight. “We’re
hurting them badly,” he told himself.
Then he noticed that the enemy fire was growing weaker. The
regiment looked around through the smoke. As the smoke lifted,
they saw a battlefield without soldiers. Only the dead were still
  there. The blue soldiers stood up slowly. Their eyes burned and
their faces were dirty, but they were happy. They shook hands
and smiled proudly. They felt like real soldiers now.
Chapter   
“He’s wrong!”
Their small corner of the forest was quiet again. There were
battle noises far away, but the regiment was out of danger. They
started marching back toward their lines. The men were nervous,
looking behind them. They were afraid of a bullet in the back. “If
I’m going to die. I want to die in battle!” thought the young
soldier. “Not like this!”
They passed another regiment. The men were resting under
some trees. Their faces were hard and sunburned, and their
uniforms were old and dirty. They laughed and called out as the
regiment passed.
“Where have you been? Are you coming back already? Where
are you going? Home to mother?”
The tired regiment heard this, but they didn’t reply. One man
wanted to fight. An officer pushed him back into line. The men
walked heavily with their heads down. The young soldier looked
at the older soldiers with eyes full of hate.
Finally, they got back safely to their line. Henry thought about
the battle. He was pleased with his day’s work.
As the regiment was resting, a general arrived on a tired horse.
“Look!” said Henry to Wilson. “He’s the one who called us
‘cowboys’!” They listened as he spoke angrily to the officers of
the regiment.
“Why did you stop?” he shouted. “Why did you stop
fighting?”
“But we went as far as we could!” said one of the officers.
“Well that wasn’t very far, was it?” shouted the general. Now-
all the men were listening. “Your men aren’t even cowboys!
They fight like farm boys!” He turned his horse and rode away.
  The men were surprised and angry. “Farm boys! He wasn’t
even there!” they said. “He didn’t see us fight! It’s all a mistake.
He’s stupid!”
“Why did he say that?” cried Henry. “We fought hard, didn’t
we?”
A group of men arrived. “Henry!” called one soldier. “Did you
hear the news? I heard two officers talking. One of them asked.
“Who was carrying the flag?” The other said. „Henry Fleming.
and Wilson. They were at the head of the regiment.’ And do you
know what he said next?”
“What?” said Henry.
“He said. ’Those two are excellent soldiers! They’ll be generals
one day!’”
Henry and Wilson spoke together. “No. it’s not true! You’re
lying!” They felt shy in front of the others, but they were very
happy. They forgot their mistakes and their worries. They silently
thanked the two officers for their kind words.
Before long, the enemy poured out of the woods again. Henry
felt calm as he looked around him. On one side, two regiments
were fighting in a field. On the other side, a blue regiment was
attacking the enemy outside a wood. There was a line of cannon
behind them. The noise was terrible. He saw small groups
fighting close together. Men on horseback moved forward, then
back again. Bright flags waved through the smoke. Rifles crashed
and men fell to the ground. The young soldier did not know who
was winning.
His regiment didn’t wait for an order. They fired and fired
again. They shouted angrily at the enemy. An officer stood
behind them, cursing loudly. A gray line of enemy soldiers ran
closer and hid behind a stone wall. Henry held the flag and
watched silently.
“That general was wrong!” he thought. “He called the regiment
‘cowboys’ and ‘farm boys.’ He’ll be sorry when I’m dead!” He
imagined his body lying in the field. It was full of bullet wounds,
but the (lag was still in his hands. The general was
  crying beside him. It was a hero’s death. Then he came out of his
dream. His comrades were falling all around him. Men screamed
in pain. Wilson was still beside him, and his face was black with
smoke. The officer was still cursing, but more quietly now. The
rifles fell silent as the regiment grew smaller.
The officers of the regiment ran up behind them. „We have to
attack!” they cried angrily. The men ran forward, shouting
loudly. The young soldier stayed in front with the flag. He felt no
fear as he ran. The bullets could not stop him. He had a clear
picture of the battle in his mind as he ran. In this picture, the blue
regiment crashed into the enemy and broke it to pieces. But as he
came closer, he saw something different. The gray soldiers were
running away. A few men turned and fired as they ran. Some of
them stayed to fight and fired from behind the wall.
The blue soldiers ran faster, shouting wildly. They were angry
with the general. “Cowboys! Farm boys! He’s wrong!” shouted
one man. “We’re good soldiers!” They turned this feeling against
the enemy. They showed their teeth like wild animals.
The young soldier didn’t look at the men who were firing at
him. He saw only the red enemy flag, waving in the smoke. It
was a prize that he had to win. Nothing could stop him. The blue
soldiers raced on through the bullets. They were very close to the
gray line. Suddenly, they stopped and fired. The noise crashed in
their ears. The group in gray was broken, but they continued
firing. Men fell dying onto the ground. A gray soldier still held
the flag. He was badly wounded and in terrible pain. Still, he
tried to protect the flag. He held on to it tightly, but he was
growing weaker. Henry saw that it was his last battle.
The blue line of soldiers poured over the wall, with Henry and
his friend in front. His friend jumped at the red flag like a
wildcat. He pulled it free, shouting wildly. He lifted it high above
his head. It was the last thing the gray soldier saw. He fell down
dead on the green grass in a pool of red blood.
  He lifted the flag high above his head.Chapter   
“It’s finished!”
The last gray soldiers threw down their rifles and sat on the
ground. They watched with unhappy faces as the blue soldiers
shouted happily. Some of the blue soldiers tried to talk to them.
One man didn’t look up or reply. A wounded man cursed them
loudly. A young gray soldier answered their questions. They
talked calmly about marching and fighting. The blue soldiers
watched and listened with interest. The enemy was a mystery
when he was far away. Now they could see his face and listen to
his voice. They saw that he wasn’t very different from them. He
was an ordinary man.
Henry and Wilson shook hands and smiled happily. They sat
together in the long grass. resting. They were still proudly
holding the two flags.
The men could still hear the faraway crash of cannon, but the
sounds of rifle fire were getting weaker. The young soldier and
his friend watched a long line of blue soldiers. They were
marching over a hill, with their rifles on their shoulders. Behind
them came officers on horseback and horses pulling cannon.
“What now?” Henry asked himself. “Another battle?”
The order came to move. There was loud cursing. They were
too tired. They stood up and formed a line. They marched slowly
back across the battlefield. As they went into the forest, they
joined another regiment.
They passed a big white house. Groups of their comrades lay
there with their rifles ready. Cannon fired at the faraway enemy.
Enemy shells answered. Horsemen rode along the line.
When they reached the road, they turned toward the river. The
young soldier understood. He looked behind him at the
battlefield. Bodies were still lying everywhere. He suddenly felt
calm. He turned to his friend. “It’s finished! We’re going back to
camp!”
  “It’s finished!”Wilson looked back over his shoulder. “You’re right,” he
agreed. “It’s finished.”
“I’m still alive!” Henry thought happily. “I’ve been to war. and
I’ve come back.” When he was fighting, he didn’t have any time
to think. Now he remembered everything. “I’ve done a lot of
brave things,” he thought proudly. The sun shone and music
played in his head. Beautiful pictures passed through his mind.
He heard an officer’s voice. “Give me ten thousand more like
you, and I’ll win the war in a week!”
Then another voice spoke. “Those two are excellent soldiers!
They’ll be generals one day!” His comrades heard these words
and smiled at him. He gave them a little smile. He watched
himself running toward the enemy position. He wasn’t afraid. He
held the flag high, and the rest of the regiment followed him.
He looked into the future. He was at home. His mother and the
neighbors were there. He was telling them about his adventures.
He was the hero of his stories, and they were listening with wide
eves. He went into town. His friends asked him questions: “What
was it like? ’Tell us, Henry.” A girl with dark hair was watching
him.
Then, a different kind of picture came into his mind. He wasn’t
happy to see it. but it stayed with him. The tall soldier stood in
front of him. He was holding his side. Blood poured out through
his fingers. ”Where have you been, Henry?” he asked. “I was
worried. I thought that you were dead.”
Then he saw the thin man. There was blood on his head, and a
bullet hole in his arm. His dying voice was weak. “Don’t go
away.” he said. “You’re hurt. I’ll look after you.”
Then he saw himself running away from the battle. He was
looking behind him with tear on his face. But he went back to his
regiment with his red badge of courage. I le was telling Wilson
his story. “I was lost, and I couldn’t find the regiment. I was far
from here, on the right. It was a terrible light. I was shot in the
head.” Henry felt very bad.
  He looked nervously at the men marching beside him. “Can
they see into my mind?” he asked himself. “Do they know my
secret?”
As he marched away from the battlefield, the terrible thoughts
stayed with him. “Will they stay with me all my life? I just want
to forget them.”
Then he grew calmer. “I was brave sometimes “he thought. “I
faced death. I was afraid sometimes, but I didn’t die of fear.” He
looked at his comrades with different eyes. “I guess they were
afraid, too” he thought. “They’re not perfect either. We’re all the
same.” He felt stronger now. He wasn’t afraid to look his
comrades in the eye. He didn’t realize it, but he was now a man.
A light rain fell on the tired soldiers. It washed away their
anger and their bad dreams. In Henry’s mind, he saw soft, green
fields under a blue sky. A little stream ran through a valley.
Over the river, the golden sun shone through the gray rain clouds.
dining room. They sat round the table and talked.
Is this idea right? If so, then how did X get into the room and how did he
or she get out? The window and door were locked from the inside. There aren t
any secret doors or other secret ways into the room. Why is there water on Sir
Michael s shirt and on the floor? К sat in Sir Michael s chair in the study and spoke to Mrs Flack.
 So they all had dinner and talked, Mrs Flack?  К asked.
 Yes, miss,  Mrs Flack said.
 Did they laugh, too, Mrs Flack? 
 Oh, yes, miss. They re all good friends. 
 Good friends, Mrs Flack? 
 Yes - well, er - Sir Michael and Lady Elizabeth, well - they often ..."
 They often had disagreements, Mrs Flack? 
 Yes, miss, but not this evening at dinner. After dinner Sir Michael and
Lady Elizabeth went to the library. Just the two of them. I knew they were
fighting. I could hear them. I was in the kitchen. They shouted and shouted. We
all heard them. 
Other ideas
K s first idea isn t very good. Think of other ideas. Then compare them with
K s.
K s second idea
He killed himself. Perhaps he used poison. No. Why? Because there wasn t
Mrs Flack answers some questions
  Then what? 
 Then Sir Michael went to his study. 
 What time was that? 
 It was nine o clock. 
 Did Sir Michael always go to his study at nine o clock? 
 Yes, always, miss. He worked in his study from  .   until  .   or  .   in
the morning. Sometimes his secretary went to his study with him,  Mrs Flack said.
 Sometimes? Did she go there this evening? 
 No, miss. I took Sir Michael a cup of coffee at  .  . I always take him a cup
of coffee at  .  .  knocked at the study door but he didn t answer. I knocked
again and again. I shouted but he didn t answer. So I called Lady Elizabeth,
Colonel Fawcett and Mr Cavell. 
 And Miss Everett? 
 No, miss. She was in the garden. Colonel Fawcett and Mr Cavell broke
down the door and we found him — Sir Michael — we found him on the floor -
dead! Oh, miss!  Mrs Flack cried. She was very sad.
Thank you, Mrs Flack,  К said quietly.
Lady Elizabeth s story
Mrs Flack left the study and К wrote her report. Then there was a knock at
the door. It was very quiet.
 Come in,  К said softly. The door opened.  You wanted to see me,  Lady
Elizabeth said.  Yes, Lady Elizabeth. Come in and sit down, please. Would you like
a drink? 
 No, thank you, Inspector. 
 How are you?  К asked quietly.
 How can you ask? Mike s gone. He s dead. Dead! It ism true, is it,
Inspector? It can t be true!   Sshh!  К said.  Tell me about him. 
 Mike? He was a good husband. We married twenty-five years ago. That s a
long time, isn t it? He was just out of the army then. He loved me and I loved him.
We didn t have any children and Mike was sorry about that. But he was always a
good husband to me. 
 Always? 
 Yes, always!  Lady Elizabeth shouted.  Well - there were . . . 
 Yes?  К asked quietly.
 Other women. All these secretaries!  Lady Elizabeth cried.  Mike liked
young secretaries — and they liked him. For his money! Look at this new one.
This . . . this . . . What s her name? This Angela Everett. The little . . . !  Lady
Elizabeth s voice was quiet but her face was red and her eyes were angry.
 Oh,  she continued,  I hated Mike s secretaries. They were always young,
always pretty and they took him away from me. But I really hate this secretary. This
Angela Everett. She comes into my house every day. She comes with Mike. "I m
sorry, Lady Elizabeth," she says in her pretty little voice. "I must take Sir Michael
from you. We have work to do." Mike loved me. I know it! I know it! But he liked
other women. He was rich, so women liked him. Yes, I loved Mike, but sometimes I
hated him. I hated him! Perhaps he s in this room now. Perhaps he can hear me. I
loved him and I hated him. He knew that well. 
 What happened this evening?  К asked.
‘I’ ll tell you,  Lady Elizabeth said.
 So Sir Michael went to his study at nine o clock. What did you jo?  К asked.
 I went to the living room because I wanted to speak to my brother, Andrew.
We sat and talked. I told him about Mike and about that woman, Everett. Andrew
knows all about it. 
 Sir Michael was in the study. Did you hear him? 
 No. At  .   I heard Nancy shouting. Andrew and I ran to the study. The door
was locked. Andrew and Colonel Fawcett broke down the door. Then I saw
Mike s body on the floor. He was dead! I telephoned the police. 
 Where was Miss Everett?  К asked.
 In the garden. She often went to the study after dinner. 
 But not tonight? 
 No. Not tonight. She was in the garden. Why did Mike die? He didn t kill
himself, so perhaps she knows. Perhaps she can tell you. A woman like that can t
bring good to this house. Can I go now?  Lady Elizabeth asked suddenly.
 Of course,  К said.  Thank you, Lady Elizabeth. 
Colonel Fawcett s story
The time was   .  .There was a knock at the study door.
 Can I come in?  a voice asked. It was a man s voice.
 Yes,  К said.
The door opened and Colonel Fawcett came in.  You want to see all of us
tonight, Inspector? 
 Yes,  К said.  A drink, Colonel Fawcett? 
 Yes, please. 
 Shall I get you a whisky? 
 Yes, please. I need one! 
 Would you like some ice? 
 Ice? Er - er - no, thank you. I don t want any ice. Just water, please. Thank
you. 
  He was your friend,  К said.
 Yes. A very good friend, too,  the Colonel said, putting his head between
his hands. Dead! Michael Gray dead! I can t believe it. 
 It s sad,  К said,  but it s true. Tell me about him. 
 We were in the army together. That was twenty-five years ago. Then
Michael left the army, married Elizabeth and went into Cavell and Company.
That s Lady Elizabeth s family business. She was a Cavell. I left the army five years
ago. I m not in the army now but people still call me "Colonel". I needed work so I
went to my °ld fri en d, Michael. He helped me. 
 Helped you? How?  К asked.
 Oh - er - um. Money. You know. 
 I don t know,  К said.
 He gave me money. 
 Gave you? 
 Lent me. 
 How much did he lend you? 
 Well - £  ,   . 
 Mm. And what did you do with it? 
 I put it into my business. 
 What is your business, Colonel Fawcett? 
 Well, it isn t really a business ... horses ... you know. 
 You gambled the money,  К said.
 Yes, I gambled and lost,  the Colonel said.  Michael knew about this. He was
very angry with me. He said, "I lent you this money and now you must pay it back to
me." I said, "I can t. I haven t any money!" He said, "Then you must sell your
house!" I didn t want to sell my house. We couldn t agree about that. 
 He s dead now,  К said.  Are you really sorry? 
 Sorry? Of course I m sorry. We couldn t agree about money, but we were
friends. Good friends. Army friends are always good friends. 
 What did you do in the army, Colonel? 
 I was with the engineers. Michael was with the engineers, too. 
‘Are you an engineer? 
‘I was- an engineer. 
‘And now you gamble with other people s money,  К said.  I gambled and
lost. 
‘So you had a fight with Sir Michael about money. Tell me a bout it. 
 Tell me about tonight. 
 Tonight? After dinner I went to the living room. I went with Andrew.
Michael and Elizabeth went to the library. They were fighting. We heard them from
the living room. They often had fights, Michael and Elizabeth. Michael - you
know - he liked women. And Angela, well, she s a pretty little thing.  The Colonel
smiled.  Just like you, Inspector. A pretty little thing. 
 Thank you, Colonel,  К said coldly and smiled.  What did you do after
dinner? 
 Well, Michael went to his study. Elizabeth came to the living room and I
went to the library. I sat in the library and read. 
 Alone? 
 Yes, alone. The housekeeper, Mrs Flack, brought me some coffee at  .  .
Then she took some coffee to Michael. His door was locked. Then I heard her
shouting. I ran to the study. You know the story. 
 Yes, but not all the story — yet!  К said.  You can go now, Colonel, and
please call Miss Everett for me. 
Angela Everett s story
 I don t like this room,  Miss Everett said as she came in.  Mick died in here.
Only two hours ago — Mick died in here. Why do you use this room? 
 I have my reasons,  К said.  Sit down, Miss Everett. Can I offer you a drink? 
 Yes, please. I d like a very large whisky and a lot of ice, please. 
К went to the fridge.
She opened it, then she opened the freezer and took out the ice-tray. She put
some ice in Miss Everett s drink and then put the ice-tray back in the freezer. К
looked into the freezer, then she looked at Miss Everett.
 Why are you looking at me like that?  Miss Everett asked
suddenly.
 Colonel Fawcett calls you "a pretty little thing". Are you?  К asked.
 Are you?  Miss Everett asked. She spoke coldly, too.
 I m asking the questions,  К answered.  Here s your drink. 
 Thanks. 
 Sir Michael loved you. 
 Of course he did. Didn t she tell you? 
 She? 
 That woman. His wife. She didn t love him. She had fights with him. All
the time. She had fights with my Mick. 
  Mick? 
 Yes, he was "Mick" to me. "Mike" to her. "Michael" to other people. My
Mick loved me. She always shouted at him. So he came to me. She gave him hate.
I gave him love. 
 You really loved him? 
 Of course. I loved him deeply. And she knew it. I hate her. I hate that
woman,  Miss Everett shouted.  She hated my Mick. That s why I hate her. She
murdered him. I know it. I know it. 
 Sir Michael was fifty-five. And you are twenty-five. 
 What are you suggesting?  Miss Everett asked.  Don t you know any nice
men of fifty-five? Mick was nice. Really nice. 
 And rich,  К said.  He left a lot of money to you, in his will. 
 I m asking the questions. You re here to answer them,  К said.  Didn t you
know about the money? 
 Yes,  Miss Everett answered.
 How much did he leave you? 
 I don t know. 
 You know very well. Tell me,  К said.
 Mick changed his will two weeks ago. He left a lot of money to her, of
course. She doesn t need money. She s rich. But he left £   ,    to me. He told
me about it. 
 Sir Michael s death is a good thing for you, isn t it? 
 Good for me? What are you suggesting? I loved him. Don t you
understand? 
 Oh, I understand, but perhaps you re rich now. Perhaps you have
£   ,   . 
 Are you jealous?  Miss Everett asked K.  Listen, policewoman, I love money.
That s true. But I loved Mick. Do you hear? I loved Mick. Why did the police send
a woman detectives? Miss Everen. asked.
 Why don t you ask them?  К answered.
 You re pretty,  Miss Everett said.  My Mick liked pretty women. His wife
was a pretty woman years ago, but she isn t now. 
 I must tell her that,  К said.
 Yes.Tell her. Please tell her I said so! 
 You often went to the study with Sir Michael after dinner. 
 Yes.We worked together.We usually went to the study at  .  . I had a
whisky with Mick. Then we worked. The housekeeper usually brought us a cup of
coffee at  .  .  worked until   .  , then I went home. 
 But you didn t go to Sir Michael s study tonight? 
 No, I didn t. It s strange. 
 Strange? 
 Yes, Mick didn t want me to go. He wanted to be alone. 
 Tell me about it. 
 And where were you tonight — at the time of the murder? 
 In the garden. 
 Where, in the garden? 
 Outside Mick s study. 
 Why? 
 I wanted to walk. It s a cold night but it s fine. I needed air. Mick was in his
study. I wanted to be with him and I was alone. I didn t want to stay in the house. 
 You were afraid,  К said.
 Afraid? Why? 
 Perhaps Sir Michael wanted to change his will again.You were afraid of that.
You didn t want that, did you? 
 That s not true. I only wanted to be with him. It wasn t the money. 
 You want to be a rich woman. 
 Quiet!  Miss Everett shouted.  I m pretty and you hate me. You like her. Well,
listen. I didn t do it. I didn t do it!  Miss Everett ran out of the room.
Andrew Cavell s story
 Can I come in?  a voice said. The voice was calm, cold, upper-class.
 Yes, and shut the door please,  К said. She looked up.
 It s me. Andrew Cavell. Miss Everett has left — I think. 
К looked at this proud man in his fine suit.
 Miss Everett has left — you think,  К said.
 I heard her. We all heard her,  Mr Cavell laughed.
 A little whisky, Mr Cavell?  К asked.
 Yes, please. 
 Shall I get you some ice? 
 Er - no, thanks. Just water, please. Thank you. 
 What can you tell me about Sir Michael? 
 A lot.What do you want to know? 
 A lot. 
 Well, I didn t like him. I can tell you that. He was my sister s husband, but I
didn t like Michael Gray at all. I never liked him.
 Michael Gray married my sister twenty-five years ago. He wasn t a rich
man then -just out of the army. We - the family -took him into the company. My
father, Lord Cavell, liked him. He worked hard and before long he became the
boss of Cavell and Company. Cavell and Company is the family business.
Michael was a hard worker, but he married into money. 
 You never liked him. Why? 
  For a number of reasons. He often had fights with Eli/abeth and I didn t
like that at all. He liked women and he spent a lot of money on them. But he spent
money like water. I didn t like that. It s our money, the family s. He changed his
will. My sister told me about it. He wanted to leave .£   ,    to that silly girl,
Angela Everett. 
 His secretary. 
 Yes — his secretary. 
 Why did you come to "Flanders", Mr Cavell? 
 I wanted to speak to Michael. We had a talk before dinner. 
 Tell me about it. 
 Well, he s dead now, so that s good for Cavell and Company. 
 Yes, it s excellent. 
 And you re glad? 
 Yes. He s dead and I m glad. The family business is more important to me
than Michael Gray. Of course, I m sorry for my sister. She really loved him. 
 Did Sir Michael leave £   ,    to Miss Everett? 
 I don t know. I haven t seen the will. He talked about it. 
 Perhaps Miss Everett is a rich woman now. 
 Perhaps she is. 
 You re a cold man, Mr Cavell. 
 Cold? 
 Yes. He s dead and you re glad. Perhaps he has left £   ,    to his
secretary, but you don t even look angry. You really hated Sir Michael, didn t you?
Behind that calm face, you hated him. 
 True, madam, but I didn t murder him. 
 Sir Michael died at  .  . Where were you at the time? 
 Hasn t my sister told you? I was in the living room. She spoke to me about
Everett. Then we heard Nancy - Mrs Flack. We ran outside. We ran to the study
door. Colonel Fawcett and I broke down the door. We saw the body on the floor
— just there. Elizabeth immediately telephoned the police. 
 Did you touch the body? 
 No. Michael was dead. We all saw that and we didn t touch the body. We just
waited for the police. 
 And the police sent me .
 Yes, madam. The police sent you!
 Thank you, Mr Cavell. 
 Excuse me, but can we all go to bed now? 
 No, I m sorry. It s late, but I must speak to all of you. But first I must speak to
Mrs Flack again. 
 I ll send her to you. 
 Thank you, Mr Cavell. 
Nancy Flack s story
 Whisky, Mrs Flack? 
 Oh, yes, please, miss. I d like a large one. 
 You like whisky, Mrs Flack? 
 Er ... well, miss ... I ... 
 You often drink Sir Michael s whisky ... ? 
 I . . . well. . . I ... 
 Ice? 
 No, no, thank you. Well, yes, please. 
К took the ice-tray out of the freezer. She took a piece of ice out of it and
put it in the whisky.  Look at this tray, Mrs Flack. 
 What about it, miss? I filled it this morning. 
 Well, Sir Michael died here - in front of the fridge. He had a glass of
whisky in his hand. He wanted some ice, so he went to the fridge. He didn t get
any ice. 
 How do you know, miss? 
 Only you and Miss Everett have had ice in your whisky.That s two pieces. Sir
Michael didn t have any. That s strange, isn t it? 
 Yes, miss, it s very strange. 
 How long have you been with the family? 
 Forty years. 
 That s a long time. 
 Yes, miss. Lady Elizabeth was a little girl then — eight years old. Mr Andrew
was a baby. I worked for Lord and Lady Cavell. They re dead now. 
 You like the family? 
 Yes, miss. I love them all. They re all very kind to me. I love my Lady
Elizabeth. 
 And Sir Michael? Did you love him? 
 Yes, miss. I loved him, too. They married twenty-five years ago. I
remember it well. I ve worked for them since then. Sir Michael was a good
man. A kind man. 
 He and Lady Elizabeth often had fights. 
 Yes, miss. But he loved her deeply and she loved him. 
 But he liked pretty girls. 
 He was a man, miss. 
 And Miss Everett? What about her? 
 Oh, I don t like her, miss. I was always afraid of her. 
 Afraid? 
 Yes, miss. She wasn t like the other girls. Sir Michael listened to her.
"Perhaps they ll run away and leave Lady Elizabeth," I thought, and I didn t like
 that. 
 You were afraid of it. 
 Yes. 
 Why? 
 Well . . . I clean this study every day, miss and ... 
 And you always read Sir Michael s letters? 
 I ... er . . . yes, miss. 
 Tell me about it. 
 Now they can t run away together. Aren t you glad, Mrs Flack? 
 No, miss. 
 No? 
 No, because Sir Michael s dead. I didn t want Sir Michael to run away with
Miss Everett. But I didn t want him to die. I looked after him for twenty-five
years, miss. 
 You re very loyal to this family, Mrs Flack. 
 Yes, miss. That s the word, "loyal". I don t know why.You see, I haven t got a
family, miss. This is my family. Now I want to be with Lady Elizabeth. Always. I
want to help her and look after her. Miss Everett is a bad woman. Sir Michael is
dead. She s taken Sir Michael from us. She s really bad, miss. 
 Tell me about tonight, Mrs Flack. 
 Well, miss. Dinner was at  .  . After dinner I made some coffee for
Colonel Fawcett and some coffee for Sir Michael. I always take — er — took —
coffee to Sir Michael after dinner. Lady Elizabeth and Mr Andrew were in the living
room. They didn t want any coffee. I took the coffee to Colonel Fawcett in the
library. Then I went to the study with Sir Michael s coffee. I knocked at the door
but he didn t answer. I tried to open the door, but it was locked — you know the
story, miss. 
 Yes. You shouted and three of the others came. Miss Everett didn t come. 
 No, miss. She says she was in the garden. 
 She was in the garden, Mrs Flack. Then Colonel Fawcett and Mr Andrew
broke down the door. And you saw Sir Michael. He was right there,  К said,
pointing,  right there, just behind you. On the floor. Dead! 
Mrs Flack looked behind her and jumped.  Yes, miss. Just there!  She put
her head between her hands and cried.
 You can go now, Mrs Flack. Thank you. 
Who did it? You decide!
  Lady Elizabeth murdered her husband because:
a)
she was jealous of Angela Everett.
b)
she hated him.
c)
her brother wanted it.
  Colonel Fawcett murdered Sir Michael because:
a) he was afraid of him.
b) he didn t want to pay back the £  ,   .
c) he gambled.
 
a)
b)
c)
Angela Everett murdered Sir Michael because:
she was jealous of Lady Gray.
she wanted £   ,   .
she hated him.
  Andrew Cavell murdered Sir Michael because:
a) he didn t like him.
b) he wanted to save his company.
c) he wanted to save his sister.
  Nancy Flack murdered Sir Michael because:
a) she always read his letters.
b) she drank a lot.
c) she didn t want him to run away with Angela Everett.
Who do you choose? X is:
a) Lady Elizabeth.
b) Colonel Fawcett.
c) Angela Everett.
d) Andrew Cavell.
e) Nancy Flack.
K s notes
All these people had a reason to kill Sir Michael.
Lady Elizabeth
Reason: Jealousy
Notes: Lady Gray really loved her husband and he loved her. But he liked women and Lady
Gray was very jealous. She was jealous of all Sir Michael s secretaries, but she was very jealous of
Angela Everett. She wanted to punish her husband, so she murdered him.
Colonel Fawcett
Reason: Money
Notes: Sir Michael really wanted his money back and Colonel Fawcett didn t want to pay it.
He didn t want to sell his house. He gambled and lost the money in a silly way. He was afraid, so he
murdered Sir Michael.
Angela Everett
 Reason: Money
Notes: She didn t love Sir Michael and he didn t love her. She only
wanted his money. Did Sir Michael leave money to her in his new will? Yes, Angela thought. She
wanted £   ,   , so she murdered Sir Michael.
Andrew Cavell
Reason: Loyal to his family and to the business, Cavell and Company.
Notes: He s a cold man. He really didn t like Sir Michael. Sir Michael  spent money like water 
and he was worried about this. He wanted to save the company, so he murdered Sir Michael.
Nancy Flack
Reason: Loyal to Lady Elizabeth
Notes: She has looked after the Cavells and the Grays for    years. She really loves Lady Gray and
she loved Sir Michael, but she hated Angela Everett. This question worried her: Is Sir Michael going to
run away with Everett? She wanted to stop this and to punish Sir Michael. So she murdered him.
 .  : In the study
 It s very late. I know and I m sorry. I m sorry for all this trouble. You re all
tired. Please sit down. Mrs Flack has brought us some coffee. That s very kind, Mrs
Flack. Thank you. It s late and we all want to go to bed, but I must speak to you. Of
course, I ve spoken to you alone, one by one. There are three questions which I
must answer:
  Who murdered Sir Michael? One of you murdered him. You are sitting
there. You are looking at me and there is murder in your heart. Perhaps I know
your name, perhaps I don t. I can t tell you yet.
  Why did X murder Sir Michael? You all have reasons. Perhaps you were
jealous, perhaps you wanted money, perhaps you were loyal. I can t answer this
question yet.
  How did X murder Sir Michael? Don t tell me. I can save you the trouble.
I know the answer to this question now. I can tell you. 
What happened between  .   and  .  ?
 Sir Michael s death was strange. He was alone in the room, and the door and
window were locked from, the inside. X didn t come into the room and didn t
leave the room at the time of the murder. X prepared the murder carefully. How
did X prepare the murder? I know the answer — I think. You all know very well
what Sir Michael did every day. Sir Michael always went to his study after dinner.
Sometimes his secretary went with him, but she didn t go with him tonight. Sir
Michael always had a drink and worked until late. Mrs Flack always brought him
some coffee after dinner. What happened between  .   and  .  ? That s the
question. I won t answer it yet. I want to say one thing. Sir Michael was    
centimetres tall. Now look at the fridge. The freezer is     centimetres above the
floor. This is important. The freezer is in line with Sir Michael s heart. What
happened? 
Try to answer K s question - .
DON T TURN OVER YET!
 Sir Michael went into his study at  .  . He locked the door and the
window.Then at  .   he sat down at his desk and wrote. Then from  .   until
 .   he used the dictaphone. At  .   he went to the drinks cupboard. He
wanted some whisky. He poured some whisky into a glass and then a little water.
He drank some. Then he wanted some ice. After opening the fridge, he opened
the freezer. He pulled the ice-tray with his left hand and then what happened? He
started a mechanism which was in line with his heart. This mechanism shot an
icicle into Sir Michael s heart. Sir Michael turned and fell to the floor. He was
dead. The glass fell out of his right hand. The icicle was in his heart, so there was
blood and water on his shirt and blood and water on the carpet. There wasn t a
gun or a knife. The sharp "knife" was an icicle. It disappeared — and there was only
water!
 The mechanism is still in the wall behind the freezer. It isn t working now.
One of you put it there. One of you carne into this room before Sir Michael and
put it there. Who was it?  К asked.  I want to know.
 Was it you, Lady Elizabeth?  К asked.  You were jealous of Sir Michael s
secretaries. You hate Angela Everett and you wanted to punish your husband. 
 No, no. I didn t do it. I loved him. I loved him. 
 Was it you, Colonel Fawcett? He lent you a lot of money. You gambled it on
horses and lost it. He wanted it back. 
 Of course not, Inspector. He was my friend. 
 And you, Miss Everett? He changed his will and perhaps "he left you
£   ,   . That s a lot of money and just what you wanted. 
 I did it.You think that, don t you, policewoman? Well I didn t!  Angela
Everett shouted the words at K.
 And you, Mr Cavell, always so calm? You were worried about the £   ,   .
You wanted to save the company. Sir Michael spent money on women and you
didn t like it. 
Mr Cavell didn t answer.
 And you, Mrs Flack? You read his letters. You wanted to punish him. 
 Oh, miss, I didn t, miss, really I didn t. I didn t do it. 
 Between  .   and  .   Sir Michael wrote at his desk. What did he write?
That s the question. He wrote a letter to Andrew Cavell. I have it here. I ll read
some of it to you. Dear Andrew, You re worried about money, I know. I changed my will
 two weeks ago, but I didn t leave any money to Angela. She thinks so, but I didn t. She s a
silly girl and I m tired of her. Perhaps I need a new secretary . . . 
 Oh! Angela cried.  The pig! The pig!  She shouted the word ‘pig’.
 And at  .   he used his dictaphone. What did he say? Listen to
his voice . . . "Angela, my dearest. You re a nice girl and you ve been good to
me, but it can t continue. I m speaking these words to you because I don t want to
write a letter. I want to speak to you. I want to say goodbye to you. You re a
young woman and your life is in front of you. Goodbye, my dearest. I only .. . 
 Why? Why?  Angela screamed.  The pig! I hate him. I hate all of you! I hate
you! I hate you! 
 You took him from me!  Lady Elizabeth cried.
 Quiet!  Miss Everett shouted.  You can have him. He s dead! You and your
family! You Grays and Cavells. All so upper-class! With your fine houses and your
fine cars and your money! You can only think of money. He never loved me and
I knew it. An old man of fifty-five! Pah! And I didn t love him.Yes, I wanted his
money, but I couldn t have it. Of course I didn t murder him. One of you did that.
Thanks. You saved me the trouble. He s dead and I m glad. 
Putting her face in her hands, Miss Everett ran out of the room.There
were tears in her eyes.
Colonel Fawcett got up.  No, don t follow her, Colonel Fawcett,  К said.
 She won t leave. She can t leave. My people are all round the house. 
 She called Sir Michael a pig!  Mrs Flack cried.  Did you hear, miss? That
woman called Sir Michael a pig! 
Goodnight
К looked at her watch. It was  .  .  We must all go to bed,  she said.  We re
all tired.  Then she spoke to Lady Elizabeth.  It s very late, Lady Elizabeth,  К said,
 and I can t leave this house. You must all stay in the house, too. You can t leave, so
don t try. There are police all round it. Where can I sleep, Lady Elizabeth?  К
asked.  I don t want to stay in this room. 
 There s a room upstairs,  Lady Elizabeth said.  You can sleep there, Inspector. 
 Thank you, Lady Elizabeth. Goodnight to you all,  К said.
 Goodnight, Inspector,  they all said.
They all left the study and went upstairs to their bedrooms. Kay went
upstairs, too.
A shape in the dark
It was three o clock in the morning. It was very dark and the house was
very quiet. К went downstairs quietly and went back to the study. She sat in Sir
Michael s chair and waited . . .  .   . . .  .   . . .  .   . . .  .   . . .  .   ...  .   . . . К
was very tired. She only wanted to sleep . . . to sleep . . . to sleep.
Suddenly she looked up! She heard a noise. It was the study door. The
door opened very quietly. К saw a shape in the dark. She saw the shape of a
man! К could see very well in the dark. She watched and listened. The person
went to the fridge. He pulled the fridge quietly from the wall. Then he pulled a
small box out of the wall.  The mechanism!
He s
come for the
mechanism!  К thought. She got up and went quietly towards the dark shape. The
man looked at the box and didn t hear K.  Don t move!  К said softly.  Don t move,
or ...   Aaah ... !  the man cried. He tried to run out of the room.
DON T TURN OVER YET!
Who is the man in the dark? You decide!
К jumped on the man and held his arms. She hit the man hard in the neck.
Then a quick move and he was on the floor!
 Aargh!  the man cried. Suddenly К turned on the light and looked down at
the floor.
 Colonel Fawcett!  she cried.
 Yes, Inspector. It s me. Ooh! Please don t hit me again.You re a pretty little
thing, but you fight like a man. Ooh!  Colonel Fawcett touched his neck lightly.
 You came for the mechanism,  К said.  I waited for you. I ve been here since
three o clock. I was sleepy five minutes ago, but I m not sleepy now! 
The mechanism was on the floor. Colonel Fawcett took it in his right hand.
 I didn t think . ..  he said.  I didn t think . . and his voice died away.
The answer to K s first question: How . . . ?
 Just a minute, Inspector,  Colonel Fawcett said suddenly.  I m not the
murderer. You don t think that, do you? 
 Then why are you here?  К asked.
 I wanted to see this mechanism. I m an engineer, remember? I tried to sleep,
but I couldn t. I thought about this mechanism. How clever, I thought, I must see
it. So I came downstairs. After moving the fridge, I got the mechanism out of the
wall. Then you attacked me. Ooh! You really hurt me.  Colonel Fawcett touched
his neck again.  But look at this mechanism! You see? It was behind the fridge.
The box went into the wall and this piece went into the back of the freezer. This
  string was tied to the ice-tray. Michael pulled the ice-tray and this worked the
mechanism. It was in line with his heart. Look inside the box. See? It s a strong
bow. Very small, of course. And it shoots icicles! Michael opened the freezer, pulled
the ice-tray and WHAM! — an icicle through the heart! Then it turned to water
and disappeared. The "knife" just disappeared! Very clever! 
 Michael made this bow,  Colonel Fawcett said.  It s small but strong. The
murderer put an icicle in the freezer just before nine o clock. Michael pulled the
ice-tray. It was frozen to the bottom of the freezer. So he pulled it hard. The icicle
went into the string on the bow. The string went back and WHAM! Michael was
shot through the heart.Very clever! 
 Sir Michael made this bow?  К asked.
 Yes. He often made things like this in the army.  Suddenly Colonel Fawcett
stopped. He spoke slowly.  Michael made this bow and it killed him.Who put it
behind the fridge? Not me! 
 You didn t. I know,  К said.
 Then who . .. ? 
 I ll answer that question поw!  К said softly.  Sshh!  She walked to the door
very quietly. Then she suddenly opened the door.
 Aaaah! 
There s a person outside the door.Who is it?You decide!
The answer to K s second question: Who . . . ?
 Nancy! К cried.
 Oh, miss!  Mrs Flack cried.
 Nancy!  К said.  What are you doing there? 
Mrs Flack didn t answer.
 You re listening, aren t you, Nancy? 
 Yes, miss,  Mrs Flack said.
К pulled Nancy into the room.  Now answer me. Why are you listening? 
 I want to know . . . I want to know ... about the murder, miss. 
 Yes. You want to know,  К said.  This bow was in the wall behind the
fridge. You wanted to take it out. And why did you want to take it out? 
Mrs Flack didn t answer.
 You can t answer? Then I ll tell you.You wanted to take it out because
you put it there.You put it there before nine o clock last night. 
Mrs Flack still didn t answer.
 Didn t you?  К shouted.
 Yes, miss,  Mrs Flack said softly.
The lights went on all over the house. First Angela Everett came
downstairs, then Andrew Cavell, then Lady Elizabeth. They all went into the
study.
 Oh, I m so sleepy,  Miss Everett said.  What s happening? What s all this
noise? 
Andrew Cavell looked at the bow and then at Mrs Flack. But he didn t
speak. Lady Elizabeth looked at the bow and then at Mrs Flack. That s Michael s, 
she said.  He made it. He often made things like that.  She went to Mrs Flack and
held her arms.  Now look at me, Nancy,  she said quietly. Look into my eyes.  Mrs
Flack looked up slowly.  Look into my eyes,  Lady Elizabeth repeated. Mrs Flack
looked into Lady Elizabeth s eyes.  Now tell me. You didn t do it. Tell me that
please, Nancy. You didn t kill my husband. 
 But I did, my Lady,  Mrs Flack said.  I killed him, but ...   Nancy!  Lady
Elizabeth screamed.  Oh, Nancy! How could you, Nancy? How could you?
You ve looked after my family for forty years, Nancy. You came to this family forty
years ago. I was a child of eight. Andrew was a baby. You love us. We love you.
You ve looked after Michael for twenty-five years.You loved him, too. Nancy, you
couldn t do this bad thing. You couldn t! You couldn t! Why, Nancy, why? 
 Oh, my Lady,  Nancy said with tears in her eyes.  Sir Michael made this
bow. I took it and made a plan. I came into this study last night at  .  . You didn t
hear me. I put an icicle in the freezer. I made the icicle in the big fridge in the
kitchen. I put the mechanism in the wall behind the freezer a week ago. I prepared
the mechanism a month ago. Last night I put the icicle into place. Last night was the
night. I worked carefully and didn t leave any fingerprints. I ve prepared for a long
time for last night. 
 Yes, but why did you do it?  Lady Elizabeth said.
The answer to K s third question: Why . . . ?
 But, my Lady, I didn t want to kill Sir Michael. I loved him and I love you.
He wasn t always kind to you and you often had fights. He went with other
women. But I wanted to kill that woman there! That bad woman, Everett. She
usually came to the study with Sir Michael. She did the same thing every day. She
poured some whisky into a glass for Sir Michael. She put some ice in the whisky. I
prepared this mechanism very carefully for her, but last night she didn t come. She
was in the garden. I didn t know that at the time. I was in the kitchen. At  .   I
brought the coffee and Sir Michael didn t open the door. Then I knew. He was
dead! Dead! And that woman, that bad woman wasn t! Oh, my Lady, what could I
do? What could I do?  Tears ran down Mrs Flack s face.
A policewoman went to her and said softly,  Come to the station with us
now, Mrs Flack.  She took Mrs Flack out of the room.
 What could I do? What could I do?  Mrs Flack said again and again.
  Goodbye
It s early morning. The sun is just coming up in the cold blue sky. A pretty
girl is sitting in a fast car. She looks happy. The fast car is just outside  Flanders .
Three people are standing next to the car: Lady Elizabeth, Andrew Cavell and
Colonel Fawcett. They say goodbye.The pretty girl speaks to Colonel Fawcett.
 Where s Miss Everett? 
 She s already gone,  the Colonel said.  I called you "a pretty little thing" —
and you are!  Colonel Fawcett laughed.
 Thank you, Colonel. I m not working now. I ve changed my clothes. That s
the end of my first case. I m not "K" now. I m Katrina Kirby.The day s just
starting. Goodbye! 
 Goodbye!  the Colonel called.
Brrni! The sound of the big car broke the quiet of the morning. Brrm!
  America
Think of a big, beautiful, empty land
with mountains, forests, lakes,
animals and fish, but no people. This
was America   ,    years ago.
Around that time, the first people
probably arrived in Alaska from
Asia. They travelled south and
became the North American Indians,
and the Aztecs, Mayas and Incas and
other peoples of Central and South
America. Later came the Inuit
(Eskimos) of Canada and the Arctic.
But there are only a few of these early
peoples in America today.
In the sixteenth century Europeans
started to come to America, and soon
after that, they brought workers -
slaves - from Africa. Large numbers
of immigrants continued to arrive
from all over the world until the
middle of the twentieth century.
The empty land was now full of
people, speaking different languages
and with different ideas. There are
just three countries now in North
America: Canada, Mexico and the
USA. But there
were nearly several
more. The  United
States of America 
was not always
united. The    
million people who
live in its fifty states
are not all the
same. So how was
the USA born?
How did it grow?
And what sort of
country is it now?  The Pilgrim Fathers
For thousands of years, America and
its peoples were unknown to the rest
of the world. The Vikings visited
Canada from Scandinavia around
AD     , but did not stay. Then, in
    , a brave Italian sailor called
Christopher Columbus reached the
Caribbean, while he was looking for
a sea route from Europe to India.
Columbus did not stay either. It was
only in the sixteenth century that the
Slaves working in the tobacco fields
and went to England, where she died.
The farmers discovered that it
was easy to grow tobacco in
French, the Spanish, and the
British all started to come and
Virginia, so they brought
African people to work
in the fields as their slaves.
Smoking was becoming
very fashionable, and
the Americans found a big
live in North America.
In the early seventeenth
century, two very different
groups of English people
made the dangerous
journey across the Atlantic.
In     , a group of farmers
began the colony of
market for their tobacco
Jamestown, in Virginia. They
fought with the Indians, and
many died because they were ill and
did not have enough to eat. But
Pocahontas, the daughter of an
Indian chief, became a friend of
Captain John Smith and helped him
and the other English people. She
later married a man called John Rolfe
Pocahontas
in Europe.
In     , another group of
    English men, women and
children arrived in Plymouth,
Massachusetts. We know these
people, who had very strong ideas
about religion, as the  Pilgrims , or
 Pilgrim Fathers . They did not want
to live in England because they did
not agree with the Church ofEngland, so they sailed to America in
a ship called the Mayflower. They
became not only farmers, but also
businessmen who bought and sold
animal skins. They thought that all
men were equal and so they did not
have slaves.
The Pilgrims too were often ill and
hungry, and nearly half of them died
in the first year. But they were helped
by friendly Indians, who showed
them how to grow corn. In the
autumn of     , the Pilgrims had a
big dinner to give thanks for the first
food that they had grown themselves.
This day became known as
Thanksgiving, and Americans still
celebrate it every year, on the fourth
Thursday of November. It is one of
the most important holidays in the
year, and people often travel many
hundreds of kilometres to be with
their family.
USA facts
 America  was named after an
Italian businessman called Amerigo
Vespucci, who sailed to South
America between      and     .
Columbus called the Native
Americans  Indians  because he
thought that he had reached India.
The Pilgrim Fathers landing at Plymouth 
The War of Independence
By     , there were
thirteen colonies
along the east coast
of North America,
all governed by
Britain. But Britain
was a long way
away, and the
people of the
colonies became
angry at the high
taxes that the
government made
The Boston
Tea Party
them pay.
In December
     a group of men threw
    boxes of tea into the sea
at Boston because they did
not want to pay the British
tax on it. This was the
 Boston Tea Party .
A farmer from Virginia, George
Washington, became the leader of
the American army.
But the colonies did not say that
they wanted to be fully independent
until the summer of     . Thomas
Jefferson wrote the famous
 Declaration of Independence ,
where he said that the king, George
III, had broken his agreement with
his people, because he had not let
them have their rights: rights to life,
freedom and happiness. The day of
the Declaration of Independence is
another important American
oliday, celebrated each year
on July  .
The Americans finally
won the war five years
later, in October     , and
two years after that, they
were
free to govern
The British government was
themselves. In      they
now angry too, and in April
George
Washington
made George Washington
     some Americans fought a
their first president.
group of British soldiers at
The thirteen colonies, which
Lexington and Concord, in
became known as  states , grew by
Massachusetts. A few months later,
adding land to the south and west.
after the Battle of Bunker Hill, near
In     , Jefferson, the third
Boston, it was clear that Britain was
president, bought a piece of rich
at war with its American colonies.Signing the Declaration of Independence
farmland in the mid-west from
France; it was five times as big as
France itself, and it only cost $  
million. In     , the USA bought
Florida from Spain. The United States
was now twice as big as it had been
in     . And by     , after winning
Texas and the West from Mexico, it
had grown again so that it reached all
the way from the Atlantic to the
Pacific, over  ,    kilometres.
USA facts
• The names  United States of
America  and  American  were first
used at the time of the War of
Independence.
• The American flag, the Stars and
Stripes, also first appeared at that
time. It has a stripe for each of the
first thirteen states and a star is
added when a new state joins, so
there are now fifty stars.  The Civil War
This great country of   
million people was known
as the Union, but in fact
there were deep differences
between the North and the
South. And in      war
broke out - the most
terrible war that the world
had ever seen. At least
   ,    people died in the
fighting or from illness.
The war was fought to
keep the United States
united. It began because the
Slaves working in the cotton fields
southern states kept slaves
to work in the cotton fields. Slaves
The South had some of the best
were not allowed in the North, and
soldiers - one was the great Robert E.
the two sides argued about whether
Lee - and they had plenty of money
they should allow them in the new
from selling their cotton to England.
lands of the West. In     , Abraham
But the North had more men and
Lincoln, who belonged to the
more factories. They also had
Republican party, which was against
Lincoln, one of the best presidents
keeping slaves, was elected president.
that the USA has ever had.
On December   , South Carolina
Two famous soldiers helped the
said that it wanted to be independent
North to win the war: General
and the other southern states soon
Sherman is remembered in a famous
followed; they called themselves the
song about how he took   ,    of
 Confederate States of America . The
his soldiers on a journey from
fighting began on April        , at
Atlanta, in Georgia, to the Atlantic
Fort Sumter.
coast, breaking the ConfederateThe Battle of Gettysburg
states in two; after the war, he
became head of the American army.
General Ulysses S. Grant was the
man who represented the North at
Appomattox in     , when the
South, under Lee, accepted that they
had lost the war. Grant was very fair
to Lee s soldiers, who did not have to
go to prison. Some years later, in
    , he became president.
Sadly, in April     , just after the
end of the war, Lincoln was shot at
the theatre by a man called John
Wilkes Booth. After Lincoln s death,
the new president was not strong
Abraham Lincoln
enough to bring the North and the
South together. Anger and arguments,
mostly about the rights of black
people, continued.
USA fact
• A very important battle was won
by the North at Gettysburg in
Pennsylvania in     . Lincoln spoke
there afterwards about the brave
soldiers who had died. This became
known as the Gettysburg Address
and contains the famous words,
 . . . government of the people,
by the people, for the people.   The Wild West
During the nineteenth century, more
and more people went to live in the
West. Most of us have seen the  Wild
West  in films and on television, and
so we think that it was full of
cowboys and fighting. But in fact
there were very few cowboys - no
more than   ,    - and real
cowboys did not shoot each other
very often. They were hard-working
men, and at least a quarter of them
were black or Mexican. They took
cows from Texas up to the railway
towns in Kansas and Missouri to be
killed for meat. From there, the meat
was sent to the East and sold.
The cowboys almost disappeared
after about thirty years because the
land was given by the government to
farmers and their families. From
     to     , more than half a
million farmers came to live in the
West, where they grew corn and
Indians hunting buffalo
A cowboy
other crops instead of keeping cows.
The farms were very lonely, but
soon the railways helped to bring
people together. In     , the railway
line from the East met the line from
the West in Utah, so it was possible
for Americans to travel right across
the USA by train.
There were about two million
Native Americans (or  Indians ) in
America in the fifteenth century,
when the Europeans started to
colonize the country. They lived by
hunting and farming, and when they
got horses from the
Europeans, they used them
to hunt buffalo. There were
about    million buffalo
and the Indians needed themfor food, clothes, houses, knives, etc.
Sadly, the Europeans also brought
diseases which killed the Indians.
They fought and killed the Indians
too, because they wanted to take
their land for farms or railways. They
shot millions of buffalo, so that it is
said that by      there were less than
a thousand animals left in all of the
USA - and less than    ,    Native
Americans.
The Indian wars ended in     
with the Battle of Wounded Knee,
when many Sioux men, women
and children were killed by
American soldiers. After this,
Indians had to live in special
places called  reservations .
Even today, many of the
two million Native
Americans live on
reservations; they
are often very poor
and a lot of them do
not have jobs.
USA facts
• From      to     , the
mail was carried from East
to West and back again by
the famous Pony Express.
Horses were kept at
An early American railroad
different places; one man rode
with a bag of letters for about
    kilometres and then gave
it to another man. In this way,
letters only took about ten
days to cross the country.
• One very well-known
rider was Buffalo Bill
Cody. He later became
a soldier and a hunter;
they say that he shot  ,   
buffalo in one year! In the
    s, Buffalo Bill started
his Wild West Show, a kind
of travelling theatre, with the
famous cowgirl Annie Oakley.
Buffalo Bill 
New Americans
At the beginning of the nineteenth
century most American families had
come from Britain, Germany and
Scandinavia, and they were farmers
or businesspeople. But soon that
began to change.
Factories were built and cities
grew; poor people arrived from other
countries, hoping to find work.
Between      and the end of the
century, about five million people
Chinatown, San Francisco
came from Ireland alone. Another
five million immigrants came from
Italy, and millions more from Russia,
Poland and other countries of Eastern
Europe, hoping to find jobs and
freedom. America kept an  open
door  until      and about   
million people arrived between     
and     . They were often poor, had
different religions, and had not been
to school for very long; there was a
lot of prejudice against them.
The Chinese immigrants in the
West also met with prejudice. Many
people came to live in California after
gold was found there in     , and
among them were    ,    Chinese.
Many of the Chinese stayed to workbuilding the new railways. Like black
people and Native Americans, the
Chinese had no civil rights and after
    , they were no longer allowed to
enter the USA.
The Irish, Italians and Eastern
Europeans usually stayed in the big
cities of the East or the Mid-West,
like New York, Boston or Chicago,
and worked in the factories.
Although most of them learned
English and became Americans, they
also wanted to keep their own way of
life. So in many cities you can find
places known as Little Italy or
Chinatown, where the restaurants
have Italian or Chinese food. This is
all part of what makes America an
interesting and exciting country.
USA facts
• Immigrants from Europe arrived
at Ellis Island in New York,
where they were checked for
illness and other problems.
They were welcomed by the
Statue of Liberty, which was
given by France to America in
    . On it are written these
words:
 Give me your tired, your poor .. . 
• Today, the biggest number of
immigrants to the USA come
from Spanish-speaking countries
such as Mexico and Puerto Rico.
More than six million have arrived
since      and Spanish has
become the second language of
the United States.
The Statue of Liberty
Immigrants arriving at Ellis Island 
Black Americans
Today about    million of the    
million people in the USA are black.
They used to live mostly in the South,
working in the cotton and tobacco
fields. After the Civil War, white
Southerners were angry that they had
lost the war and angry that slaves
were now free. They showed a lot of
prejudice against black people. Some
whites joined the Ku Klux Klan,
groups of men who dressed in white,
covered their heads so that no one
knew them, and went out to beat and
murder black people. Black men
could not vote until     , and even
when they got the right to vote, they
often did not use it because they
were frightened.
In the
twentieth century,
black people
began to travel
to the cities of
the North and
later, to
California, to
look for work,
A Civil Rights
march
so there are now more black people
in the North than in the South.
But even in the North, they lived
separately, and in the South they
had to sit separately on buses and
eat in separate parts of restaurants.
Until     , they also had to go to
separate schools.
Then in the     s, a churchman
called Dr Martin Luther King began
to fight for the civil rights of black
people. Groups of black people
started to break the law, but not in a
violent way; they refused to use
buses, so that the bus companies lost
money. They also went into  whites
only  restaurants. In August     ,
   ,    people met in Washington
and heard Dr King speak about theHowever, there are still problems, as
was shown by the fighting in Los
Angeles in     , after a black car
driver was beaten by white policemen.
USA facts
• A story about the hard life of
slaves called Uncle Tom s Cabin,
by Harriet Beecher Stowe, was one
of the most popular books of the
mid-nineteenth century and made a
lot of people see that it was wrong
to keep slaves.
need for black people to be equal. He
began with these words, which have
become famous:  I have a dream . . . 
In     , a law was passed
giving black people their
civil rights and Dr King was
given the Nobel Peace Prize.
But in     , Dr King was
murdered in Memphis, and
fighting broke out in more than a
hundred cities.
During the     s and     s,
prejudice against black people slowly
began to become less important,
and many black
people now have
good jobs in
business and
government.
• Harriet Tubman and Frederick
Douglass were famous slaves who
helped many other slaves escape
from the South to the North using
a route called the  underground
railroad .
Martin Luther King  The government of the USA
The government of the USA has three
separate but equal branches:
Congress, the President, and the
Supreme Court. Women were given
the vote in      and all Americans
can now vote when they are eighteen
years old.
Congress makes the laws.
There are two  houses  of Congress:
the Senate and the House of
Representatives. There are a hundred
people in the Senate (two from each
state) and they are elected for six
years. There are     people in the
House of Representatives, and they
are elected for two years only. States
with more people, like California,
Washington DC
have more Representatives. Some
states, like Wyoming or Delaware,
which do not have many people, only
have one Representative.
The President is head of the
departments of government which
carry out the laws. He (until now the
president has always been a man) is
the leader of the country (like a king
or queen) and head of the army. He is
elected for four years, and can only be
elected twice. He can say  no  to laws
passed by Congress (but Congress
can also say  no  to him), and he
chooses the judges for the Supreme
Court. He lives and works in the
White House in Washington DC.
The Supreme Court is the most
important court in the country and
has nine judges; their job is to decide
what the laws mean. They can also
say that Congress has made a law
which is wrong, or that the President
has done something wrong.
The USA is a union of fifty states,
and as well as the national
government in Washington, each
state has its own government. Laws
can be very different from one state
to the next. They say very differentThe White House
Inside Congress
things about, for example, how old
you must be to vote, get married,
leave school or drive a car. Different
states punish criminals differently
too; in some states, you can be killed
for murdering someone, in others you
only go to prison.
USA fact
• There are only two important
political parties: the Republicans
and the Democrats. The Republicans
want people to work to help
themselves, and so they think that
taxes should be low.
The Democrats think that the
government should help the poor
and so it needs taxes. But the
difference between the two is not
always clear and it is not always easy
to say that one party is on the  left 
or on the  right  of the other.  Living in the USA
Most Americans who have jobs live
more comfortably than people in any
other country in the world. They
usually work a forty-hour week and
they have two weeks  holiday a year
as well as the official holidays like
Thanksgiving and Christmas. In     %
of families, both the husband and the
wife go out to work. Although more
than     % of the land is farmed, not
many people work as farmers, and
fewer Americans work in factories
than in the past. Most jobs are now
in hospitals, banks, hotels, shops, etc.
How do Americans spend their
money? Two thirds of them own
their homes, often a house with a
garden in a nice suburb. And at least
    % of families have a car. They can
use it to go to  drive-in  restaurants,
cinemas, banks, and even churches -
A suburban street
A  drive-in  bank
the USA has no official religion, but
over   % of Americans belong to a
Christian church.
If they don t want to go out,
Americans can always stay at home,
and watch television. Nearly all
families have a TV and it is said that
an ordinary family watches seven
hours a day! They have over   ,   
TV stations to choose from, most of
which are owned by private
companies, not by the government.
American TV programmes are sold
all over the world, and in manycountries people watch the news on
C N N . Few newspapers cover all the
USA, but you can buy papers like the
New York Times and the Washington
Post everywhere, as well as the
magazines Time and Newsweek.
Most Americans enjoy sports,
which helps to keep them healthy.
Their favourites are baseball,
basketball, football and ice hockey.
American football is very different
from European football; players run
and carry the ball more than they use
their feet.
A shopping mall
And, of course, Americans love to
shop; the supermarket first appeared
in America, and now many shops are
open twenty-four hours a day. In the
    s, Americans were spending
twelve hours a month in indoor
shopping centres; some of the biggest
shopping centres in the world are
in the USA - Mall of America in
Minneapolis covers half a
million square metres!
Americans have
to pay if they are
  Baseball
  Ice hockey
  Basketball
  American
footballill and visit a doctor or
foods with them. And
more and more people
are interested in healthy
eating, so they choose
 low-fat  foods, or they
refuse to eat meat.
go to hospital, but they
do not usually pay to
go to school. Schools,
like the laws, are
different from state to
state, but in most
places, everyone goes to school for
about twelve years. And about a
third of school students go on to
university.
What do Americans eat? In the
past, America gave a number of
different foods to the rest of the
world: potatoes, tomatoes, chocolate
and corn, for example. Today,
American  fast  food is sold in
restaurants in almost every country
of the world. The most famous
examples are probably hamburgers
and hot dogs, eaten with
french fries.
But if you visit the
USA you can also eat
all kinds of tasty
food from different
countries: Chinese,
Mexican, Italian . . .
the immigrants who
came to the USA
brought their
own favourite
USA facts
• The money in the USA is the dollar,
which contains a hundred cents.
Some coins have special names:   
is a nickel,     is a dime, and    
a quarter.
• Coca-Cola was first made in     
by an American called John
Pemberton. Today it is sold in    
countries and Coke is one of the
best-known words in the world.
• From      to     , during
Prohibition, it was against the law
to drink alcohol in the USA,
but many people still
wanted to drink it.
So criminals like Al
Capone became rich
by bringing alcohol
into the country.
Fast food   Cities, lakes and rivers
Boston, where the fight for
independence began in the eighteenth
century, is one of the oldest cities in
the USA. In neighbouring Cambridge
is the oldest university in the USA,
Harvard, which was opened in     ,
as well as the famous Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT).
Perhaps the most well-known
family in twentieth-century Boston
was the Kennedy family. Like many
other Boston families, they came
from Ireland. They became very rich,
and John F Kennedy, a Democrat,
became President of
the United States in
    . At that time
he said  . . . ask not
what your country
can do for you, but
what you can do for
Harvard University
your country  He and his beautiful
wife Jacqueline were young and
popular, but sadly, in     ,
 JFK  was shot and killed
in Dallas, Texas.
Everyone knows New
York, the biggest city in the
USA. It is a great place for
theatre, shopping and
Skyscrapers in New YorkThe Mardi Gras parade in New Orleans
restaurants. It is also the home of the
United Nations, whose offices are in
a beautiful glass skyscraper. In fact,
when you think of New York, you
probably think that the skyscraper
was born here.
But in fact the first really tall
buildings were built in Chicago after
the great fire of     . Today, the
Sears Tower in Chicago (more than
    metres high) is the tallest
building in the USA.
Chicago and the other cities
around the Great Lakes of the Mid-
West have more factories than
anywhere else in the USA. Detroit, on
Lake Erie, is where cars are made and
The
Model T
Ford
Satellite picture showing the Great Lakes
it is also known as one of the homes
of black popular music.
Henry Ford, who made the famous
Ford cars, was born in Michigan,
near Detroit. His  Model T  (    )
was the first car cheap enough for
ordinary people to buy.  Anyone can
drive a Ford,  they said.
Lying between Canada and the
USA, the five Great Lakes are an
important route for ships travelling
from the Atlantic, along the St
Lawrence Seaway, to the Mid-West.
Together, Lakes Erie, Ontario,
Huron, Michigan, and Superior cover
   ,    square kilometres - more
than any other group of lakes in the
world. If you go there in the summer,
it is almost like going to the sea; youcan lie on the beach or sail a boat.
But in winter it is very cold. Chicago
is sometimes known as the  windy
city  because of the cold winds that
blow in from Lake Michigan.
Thousands of kilometres south of
the Great Lakes is the state of
Louisiana, which used to be French.
The city of New Orleans, on the
great Mississippi river, is famous for
its food, which is like French and
African food together, and for Mardi
Gras, when people celebrate by
dressing in colourful clothes and
walking or dancing through the
streets, playing music. New Orleans
is also the home of jazz, which was
first played by black musicians like
Louis Armstrong in the     s.
The Mississippi river is  ,   
kilometres long and in the nineteenth
century was an important way of
travelling from north to south. Mark
Twain wrote wonderful stories about
life on and around the river: The
Adventures of Tom Sawyer (    ),
and Huckleberry Finn (    ).
The Mississippi river
USA facts
• If you drive all the way down the
Atlantic coast from New York past
Philadelphia to Washington DC,
you pass from city to suburb and
back again; it almost seems to be
one big city: a  megalopolis .
• Niagara Falls, between Lakes
Ontario and Erie, is    metres high.
• Mark Twain s real name was
Samuel Clemens and he took the
name  Mark Twain  from special
words used by sailors on the
Mississippi.  Mark twain  means
that the water is about two
fathoms, or four metres, deep.
Niagara FallsThe Arizona desert
  
Mountains and deserts
The USA has some of the biggest
cities in the world, and more than
three quarters of its people live in
cities or towns. This means that there
are also some very empty places,
which have not changed much since
the first Europeans arrived. The
government has kept some of them as
National Parks, where people are not
allowed to build houses or factories.
The wonderful Rocky Mountains, for example, in the states of
Wyoming, Montana, Colorado,
Idaho and Utah, are great for
holidays. Visitors like to go there for
walking, climbing, fishing, hunting,
or horseriding. You can also go skiing
in winter at towns like Aspen. The
only big city in the Rockies is Denver,
which is one mile ( .  kilometres)
above the sea. The air is so thin there
that it can make your head hurt when
you first arrive.
Skiing in the Rockies South of the Rockies lies the desert
state of Arizona, where the land has
fantastic colours: not just brown and
green, but red, pink, orange and blue.
The most famous place in Arizona is
the Grand Canyon. This deep river
valley was made by the Colorado
river cutting through the rock many
thousands of years ago. Today it is ,    metres deep,     kilometres
long, and between six and twenty-
nine kilometres wide. You can walk
down to the river, but it will take you
two days to get there and
back, and you must take
plenty of water to drink.
You can also fly over it,
and see the
extraordinary shapes
of the rocks.
Next to Arizona, New
Mexico is another dry, desert state,
where farming is difficult and the
people are poor. Many Native
Americans live there on big
reservations. The Navajo, Hopi,
Pueblo and Zuni are known for the
beautiful things that they make from
silver, for their colourful blankets,
their pots and for their dancing.
Many artists have also come from
other parts of America to live in and
around Santa Fe and Taos.
Native American women making blankets
Mount Rushmore
A hot water geyser
USA facts
Las Vegas, in the desert
state of Nevada, is a centre for
gambling. People make and lose
thousands of dollars there, playing
cards or other games.
The Black Hills of Dakota are
famous for Mount Rushmore,
where the faces of four American
presidents: Washington, Jefferson,
Lincoln, and Theodore Roosevelt
were cut in the rock. It took
fourteen years, from      to     .
Yellowstone Park in Wyoming and
Montana is famous for the hot
water geyser that shoots up into
the air, up to       metres high.
Salt Lake City, the chief city of
Utah, is next to a lake that is much
saltier than the sea. Even if you
haven t learned to swim, you could
probably swim in this lake!  
California
California is a state of differences. It
has the lowest, driest place in the
USA: Death Valley, which is   
metres below sea level. It is very hot
there (  . °C on the hottest day, in
    ) and in some years it does not
rain at all. But the north of the state
is quite cold and wet. This is where
the great redwood trees grow - the
biggest trees in the world. California
grows more fruit and vegetables than
any other state in the USA, and it is
famous for its wine. But it is also a
centre for computers and business. It
has more people than any other state.
San Francisco is, many people
think, one of the most beautiful cities
in the world. It was nearly destroyed
A Californian redwood tree
by an earthquake and the fire which
followed it in     . There was a big
earthquake in      and everyone
knows that one day, perhaps very
soon, there will be another, but they
continue living in San Francisco
because life there is fun.
Los Angeles is the second biggest
city in the USA. It can take hours to
drive from one side to the other - and
people almost always drive! The
number of cars means that the city
has a problem with dirty air; it also
has a lot of violence. But visitors still
come to see Disneyland, Hollywood,
where films are made, and Beverley
Hills, where you can look at the
houses of famous film stars.
San Francisco   North and South, East and West
Travelling north
Olympic Games
from California,
were held there
you come to
in     . There
are plenty of
Oregon and then
jobs, and people
Washington.
think that, like
These states are
Seattle, it is a
cool and wet,
comfortable
city
but very
to live in. It is
beautiful, with
Charleston
very different
big forests and
from the old
high mountains.
cities of the
Since the     s,
south:
Seattle has
Savannah,
become one of
Georgia, and
the most
Charleston,
popular cities in
South Carolina,
America; it is
for example,
the home of
where
there
new music and
Seattle
are still many
of coffee bars
beautiful old houses which look
selling lots of different types of
the same as they did     or more
coffee; films and TV programmes
years
ago.
are made about people who live in
Seattle. A city that was once quiet is
becoming crowded and expensive.
Away across the country is another
city which has changed a lot in the
last twenty years: Atlanta, Georgia.
It is big and modern, with one of the
busiest airports in the world; the
There are so many interesting and
exciting places to visit in the USA
that we cannot show you them all.
Use the map on the next two pages
to plan your own journey across
America, by car, by train, by bus,
or just in your dreams!Cold, lonely
Alaska is the
largest state in
the USA and is
separated from
the other states
by Canada. The
American
government
bought it from
Russia in     
for $ .  million
and it became a
state in     .
People used to
make money
from fishing and
hunting, and
gold was found
there too. But
today, it is
important for its
oil. North
America s
highest
mountain,
Mount McKinley
( ,    metres),
is in Alaska.
Nearly  ,    kilometres
west of California lies Hawaii.
This group of beautiful islands
became the fiftieth state of
the USA in     . Today,
people visit Hawaii for beach
holidays in the sun.
Texas is the
second biggest
state after Alaska.
There are still
cowboys who work with cattle, but
the modern state of Texas, like
Alaska, is rich because of its oil.Florida is known as the  Sunshine State 
because it is so warm and sunny. Many
Americans choose to live in Florida when
they retire. Oranges grow there, and visitors
come to enjoy beach holidays. They can
also visit Disneyworld and the Kennedy
Space Center.
The states of
Maine, New
Hampshire,
Vermont,
Massachusetts,
Connecticut
and Rhode
Island are
known as New
England.
Visitors go
there to see the
beautiful
colours of the
trees, which
turn red, yellow
and gold in the
autumn.Exercises
A Checking your understanding
Pages  -  Write answers to these questions.
  When did Europeans start to come to America?
  Who arrived in Massachusetts in     ?
  Why were the American people angry with the British government?
  Who was the first president of the USA?
Pages  -   Are these sentences true (T) or false (F)?
  The northern states kept slaves.
  Abraham Lincoln was president during the Civil War.
  Buffalo were very important to the Native Americans.
  The immigrants who arrived in the nineteenth century were usually rich.
Pages   -   How much can you remember? Check your answers.
  How many black people are there in the USA today?
  Who used the famous words,  I have a dream . . . ?
  What are the names of the two big political parties in the USA?
  What are Americans  four favourite sports?
Pages   -   How much can you remember? Where . . .
  . . . is the oldest university in the USA?
  . . . were the first skyscrapers built?
  . . . are Niagara Falls?
  . . . is the Grand Canyon?
Pages   -   Find answers to these questions.
  Which city was nearly destroyed by an earthquake in     ?
  Where were the Olympic Games held in     ?
  Which state did the Americans buy from Russia in     ?
  Which was the fiftieth state to join the USA?B Working with language
 
Use these words to join these eight short sentences together to make four
longer ones.
because but when where
  The South had some of the best soldiers. They lost the Civil War.
  The Europeans fought and killed the Native Americans. They wanted to
take their land for farms and railways.
  Immigrants arrived at Ellis Island. They were checked for illness.
  Many Americans go and live in Florida. They retire.
  Complete these sentences with information from the book.
  Pocahontas was . . . who . . .
  Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass were . . . who . . .
  Thomas Jefferson wrote . . . where . . .
  The Indian wars ended in      with . . . when . . .
  The city of New Orleans is famous for . . . when .. .
C Activities
  Imagine that you are on holiday in the USA. Write a letter to a friend about
the places that you have visited.
  Imagine that you were either a Pilgrim, or a black slave, or an immigrant in
the nineteenth century. You are now very old. Write a short paragraph
about how you came to the USA, and your life there.
D Project work
  Write about the people who live in your own country. Are they all the same?
Were any of them immigrants? Did they fight any wars?
  Write a short guide to your own country; include information about famous
cities, beautiful places to visit, the weather, etc.Glossary
alcohol strong drinks such as beer,
wine, whisky judge (n) the most important person
in a law court
allow to let someone do something law an order made by the
government
celebrate to enjoy a happy day
civil rights the rights of all the
people in a country to do the same
things: vote, work etc.
civil war a war between groups of
people in the same country
colony a country that belongs to
another country
crops plants that farmers grow,
usually for food
department part of a government,
business, shop etc.
earthquake a sudden, violent
movement of the earth
elect to choose people to be in
government (by voting)
equal the same
freedom being free
gambling playing games for money
government the group of people
who control a country
hunt to catch animals for food
immigrant someone who comes to
live in another country
lead to be chief
leader a person who leads
native a person born in a place, not
an immigrant
pilgrim a person who travels for a
religious reason
prejudice an idea (usually negative)
which is not based on any reason
religion following a god or gods
represent to speak for other people
retire to stop doing paid work,
usually when you are old
right (n) what the law lets you do
separate (adj) different, not joined
slave a person who belongs to
another person and has to work for
no money
state (n) a part of a country with its
own political organization
tax (n) the money that people have
to pay to the government
united joined together
independence being independent vote to say which person you want
to represent you in government
independent free, not controlled by
other people war fighting between countries or
people in the same country
A tidy ghost
by Peter Viney
Level   Streamline Connections (  -  )      words
  Looking for a house
 It s all right, Rick. It s only the post,  she called.
Six or seven thick brown envelopes lay on the doormat. Marilyn picked them up and took them into the kitchen.
Rick was sitting at the table. He was finishing his breakfast.
 Is there anything for me?  he asked.
 They re all from estate agents,  she said.  I hope there s something this time. 
She put three envelopes down in front of Rick, and began to open the others herself. They had been looking for
a house for three months. They were tired of the small flat, and they were tired of paying rent every week. They
had been saving to buy their own house for nearly two years. They began looking through the letters from estate
agents.
Rick looked up.  Here s one,  he said.  Listen. Perfect first home. Two bedrooms, large living room, modern
kitchen, bathroom, garage, small garden. And it s in Balmoral Avenue, on the new housing estate. £  ,   . What
do you think? 
 What number is it?  she asked.
 Er ... let me see. Thirty-five. Yes, thirty-five Balmoral Avenue. 
 That s funny,  she said.  I ve just been reading about the same house. Look, here s an advert from Norman and
Naylor. I phoned them yesterday. 
 Ah, my advert s from Burchill and Bradley. Yes, it s the same house. Well, that s normal. They ve put the house
with two estate agents. Which one shall we phone? 
 It doesn t really matter,  said Marilyn.  Give me the adverts. I ll phone when I get to work. 
 Work ... yes, what time is it?  said Rick.
 Oh, no! It s nearly half past eight. Come on, we should hurry ... if you don t want to be late again. 
Rick and Marilyn hurried out to the car. On the way to work they talked about the house. A lot of their friends
lived on the new housing estate, and they d been looking for a house in Balmoral Avenue, or in one of the roads
near it, Sandringham Drive or Osborne Way. Marilyn stopped the car outside Rick s office.
 I ll call the estate agent, and I ll call you later,  she said. Marilyn worked in an office near Rick s. She usually
had the car because there was more parking space at her office, and because she finished work half an hour earlier
than Rick.
Burchill and Bradley ESTATE AGENTS
   , Turnberry Road, Sandbourne, Wessex Telephone: Sandbourne (     )       
   Balmoral Avenue, High Trees Estate, Sandbourne
Detached house, built about two years ago. It has gas central heating, superb modern kitchen, and a nice garden.
GROUND FLOOR
LIVING ROOM: ( . m x .  m) Two radiators,   electric points, TV point, fitted carpet. Nice view from window.
KITCHEN/DINING ROOM: ( m x ,  m) Modern cooker and fridge, washing machine point,   electric points, tiled
floor and walls. Excellent fitted units. Radiator.
HALL: ( .  m x . m) Electric point, telephone point, fitted carpet. Large storage cupboard under the stairs. Radiator.
GARAGE:   electric point. Window.
FIRST FLOOR
BEDROOM  : ( .   m x  .  m) Radiator,   electric points, fitted carpet. Fitted wardrobe.
BEDROOM  : ( .  m x  .  m) Radiator,   electric points, fitted carpet.
BATHROOM: ( . m x  .  m) Modern bath, sink, shower. Small radiator. TOILET.
   Balmoral Avenue is in the middle of the High Trees Estate, three miles from the town centre. The High Trees Shopping
Centre is a short distance away, and so is the High Trees First School.
PRICE: £  ,   
Norman & Naylor
ESTATE AGENTS    High Street, Sandbourne, Wessex Tel: Sandbourne       
   Balmoral Avenue, High Trees Estate, Sandbourne
A modern detached house, built two years ago, with full gas central heating, excellent modern kitchen, and attractive garden.
GROUND FLOOR
Living Room ( . m x  . m) Large picture window,   radiators,   electric points, TV point, fitted carpet.
Kitchen/Dining Room ( m x  . m) AEG cooker, Indesit fridge, point for washing machine,   electric points, tiled floor and walls.
Fitted units. Radiator.
Hall ( . m x  m) Electric point, telephone point, fitted carpet. Large cupboard under the stairs. Radiator.
Garage   electric point
FIRST FLOOR
Bedroom   ( . m x  .  m) Radiator,   electric points, fitted carpet. Fitted wardrobes.
Bedroom   ( . m x  .  m) Radiator,   electric points, fitted carpet.
Bathroom ( . m x  .  m) Modern bath, sink, separate shower. Small radiator. Point for electric shaver.
Toilet With modern WC.
 The house is in the very popular High Trees Estate, about   miles from the town centre, with an excellent bus service. It is about
 /  mile from the nearest shops at the High Trees Shopping Centre and  /  mile from High Trees First School.
£  .   
  Appointment to view
Marilyn hurried into her office, and put the two adverts down on her desk.
She telephoned Burchill and Bradley at five past nine. The phone rang several times, then she heard a voice.  Hello,
this is Burchill and Bradley Estate Agents. This is a recording. I m sorry, there isn t anyone here at the moment. The
office is open from nine thirty until five thirty. If you would like to leave a message, we ll call you back. 
Marilyn put the phone down. She didn t like telephone answering machines. It was easier to call the other estate
agent. She looked at the advert again. There it was, Norman and Naylor,       . She called the number.
 Good morning. Norman and Naylor. This is Mrs Adams speaking. 
 Oh, good morning,  said Marilyn.  I ve been looking through your adverts. I m interested in    Balmoral
Avenue. I wonder if I could see it? 
 Ah, yes,  said Mrs Adams. That s easy. The owners of    Balmoral Avenue are both out at work all day.
They ve given us a set of keys. I can take you round the house at any time. Today, if you like. 
 Could you show us at lunchtime?  asked Marilyn.  My husband and I both work too. But we re free from twelve
thirty until one forty-five. 
 That s all right. I ll meet you outside the house at ... one o clock. Will that be all right? 
 That s OK, yes. We ll see you then. 
 Do you know where Balmoral Avenue is?  said Mrs Adams.
 Oh, yes. We ve been looking for a house on the High Trees Estate. 
 Right. I ll be outside the house in a blue Ford Mondeo at one o clock, then. 
 Thank you,  said Marilyn. "We ll be in a white Volkswagen. See you at one. 
Marilyn felt very excited. They had seen a lot of houses in the last few weeks, but she felt really interested in
this one. She phoned Rick at work, and told him about the appointment. They agreed to meet outside Rick s office
at twenty to one.
  Their first house
Rick was waiting when Marilyn arrived at the office. He jumped into the car, and they drove to Balmoral
Avenue. They parked behind the blue Ford Mondeo. Mrs Adams got out, and came to meet them.
 You know, it s much nicer when the owners aren t at home,  she said.  Yоu can ask as many questions as you want. 
 Yes,  said Rick,  and you don t have to agree when they tell you how nice the green and orange paint is. 
Mrs Adams laughed. That s true ... now let me find the right keys. I ve got so many sets of keys in my bag. 
Mrs Adams found the keys, and opened the door. Marilyn and Rick had been looking for a house just like it.
 It was built just over two years ago,  said Mrs Adams,  and it has everything you ll need ... central heating, a
modern kitchen, and it s been decorated very well. The carpets were put in two years ago, and the cooker and fridge
are included in the price. The kitchen s beautiful. Come on, I ll show you. 
They went into the kitchen.  Have you got any children?  said Mrs Adams.
Marilyn and Rick looked at each other.  No ... not yet,  said Marilyn.
 Well, there s an excellent school just down the road, and you can see the garden from the kitchen window ... 
Everything was easy. That evening Mrs Adams took them to see Mr and Mrs Barclay, the owners of the house.
They were very nice people. They were moving to a bigger house. Marilyn and Rick agreed to buy the house. Two
months later it was theirs! They moved in during September. They spent a lot of time painting and decorating. The
house didn t really need decorating but they enjoyed doing it. They had been living in rented flats for years, and this
was their first house. The weekends were wonderful. They painted, cleaned, decorated and worked in the garden.
By Christmas the house really seemed like home.
  A ghost in the house?
The first of the little surprises came early in January. Marilyn and Rick arrived home, as usual, just after six o clock
one Tuesday evening. Rick opened the door, and went into the kitchen to make some tea. Marilyn followed him in.
 Rick,  she said,  did you pick up the letters in the hall? 
 No,  he said,  you know I didn t. You were just behind me. 
 Well, that s funny. Look, the post arrived after we d left for work. It always does at this house. So, usually it s
lying on the doormat when we get home. Right? 
 Yes,  said Rick.  Why? 
 The post isn t on the floor now. It s in a neat pile on the table, next to the telephone. 
Rick followed her into the hall. There were four or five letters in a pile on the hall table.
 Maybe ... maybe the post arrived earlier than usual today. Perhaps it arrived before we left for work. Maybe we
picked it up, put it there, and forgot,  he said.
 No, I m sure not,  said Marilyn.  You see, I was waiting for this letter. It s from Wendy. I was thinking about it
on the way home. 
 The next surprise was two weeks later. They had been out to dinner with friends on Wednesday evening, and
they hadn t woken up when the alarm clock rang. Rick woke up at twenty to nine. They both got dressed quickly
and left home without breakfast.
They didn t make the bed, and they left their nightclothes on the floor. They were usually very tidy people, but
there wasn t enough time. When they got home, Rick went upstairs first.
 Marilyn,  he said,  come up here. 
Marilyn walked into the bedroom. The bed was made.
Everything looked neat and tidy. She pulled back the bed covers. Rick s pyjamas and her nightdress were folded
neatly on the pillows.
 I m sure we didn t make the bed,  she said.
 Did you come home at lunchtime?  asked Rick.
 No, of course not. I never do. There isn t enough time. 
 Well, you had the car,  he said.
 No, I worked through the lunch hour today. We were busy,  she said.  Rick, is this a joke? Did you ... ? 
 I didn t come home either,  he said.
 Then, we forgot,  said Marilyn. We made the bed and forgot we d done it. We drank a lot last night. I mean, we
forgot those letters a couple of weeks ago. 
There were a few more surprises in the next few weeks. Once they found the letters on the hall table again.
Another time the bathroom light was on. Rick was annoyed. He always worried about the electricity bills.
 Did you leave the bathroom light on?  he said angrily.
 No,  said Marilyn.  Anyway, you were in the bathroom after me this morning. Rick, you re beginning to forget
everything. 
Another time they were late for work, and they left their coffee cups on the table. When they got home, the
coffee cups had been washed up, and were standing on the table.
Rick laughed.  Maybe there s a ghost in the house,  he said.  A very tidy ghost. 
 Don t be silly,  she said,  it s a new house, not an old castle. There s no ghost. 
Suddenly there was a flash of lightning, and the noise of thunder. It started raining. She looked out of the window.
 Rick,  she said,  there isn t a ghost, is there? 
They both laughed then.
They didn t laugh at the next surprise. They had been out to dinner, and they got home late. They were both
tired. They went into the living room.
 I ll make some tea, Rick,  said Marilyn. "You look in the newspaper and see what s on television. 
She went into the kitchen.
 Marilyn,  called Rick,  where s the newspaper? I can t find it. 
She came back into the living room.  It was on the coffee table. I put it there this morning. 
 It isn t here now,  said Rick.
They looked everywhere for the newspaper, but they couldn t find it anywhere.
 I m tired of this,  said Rick.  Let s have a drink. 
He went to the cupboard to get the bottle of whisky they had brought back from holiday two years before. They
didn t usually drink whisky, and the bottle was nearly full. Rick opened the cupboard, and there was the newspaper!
It was folded neatly, and it was lying next to the bottle.
 Why did you put it in here?  he said.
 I didn t. I was reading it before we left for work, and I put it on the coffee table,  said Marilyn.
 I haven t opened this cupboard for weeks,  said Rick.  Anyway, neither of us would put the newspaper in here.
What s happening? 
Marilyn sat down.  Rick,  she said,  you don t think there is a ghost here, do you? 
 What? A tidy ghost? I ve never heard of a tidy ghost. 
 Why not? 
Rick sat down too.  But it s a new house. 
 Maybe someone died here. Maybe one of the Barclays  parents lived with them. Maybe they died here,  said Marilyn.
 Or maybe there were houses here before . . . before the High Trees Estate was built. 
 I don t know,  said Marilyn.  Maybe we should ask Mr and Mrs Barclay. We ve got their new address. 
 We can t,  said Rick,  it sounds so silly. "Excuse me, Mr Barclay. Did you leave a ghost here? Did you forget to
take it with your furniture?" I can t ask them. 
 Well,  said Marilyn,  I m going to the library tomorrow lunchtime. I m going to discover what was here before
this house was built. 
  A visit to the library
The next day, at twelve thirty, Marilyn hurried to the Sandbourne Central Library. She went over to the man at the desk.
 Excuse me,  she said,  have you got any books about the history of Sandbourne ... old maps, anything like that? 
 Oh, yes,  he said.  What do you want to know? 
  Er, I m interested in the High Trees Estate area. I live there, and I ve always been interested in history. 
 Well, come over here, we ll have a look. 
Marilyn followed the man to a shelf of books about the history of the area.
 I m very interested in old stories ... ghost stories ... things like that,  she said.
 Ghost stories?  he said. There won t be many ghost stories about that area. It s all new. 
 Er ... what was there before the housing estate?  asked Marilyn.
 Well, that s easy. It used to be High Trees Farm. They knocked down the farm five, maybe six years ago. 
 Have you got an old map?  she asked.
 Yes, I ll find it for you,  said the man.
When Rick came out of the office, Marilyn was waiting in the car. She opened the door.
 Rick,  she said,  I went to the library today. 
 Why?  he said. Той don t believe there really is a ghost, do you? 
 I found an old map of the area,  she said. There used to be a farm. The estate is built on an old farm. 
 So?  said Rick.
 I looked at the map. The farmhouse used to be where Balmoral Avenue is now. It used to be right in the middle
of Balmoral Avenue. 
 Yes? 
 Well, our house, number thirty-five, is right in the middle of the Avenue. Perhaps our house is just where the
farmhouse used to be. I looked in another book. The farmhouse was built about two hundred years ago. 
That doesn t mean there s a ghost! There are thousands of old houses with no ghost stories. Anyway, I don t
believe in ghosts. And neither do you. 
 Until today,  said Marilyn.  Can you explain about the newspaper in the cupboard? The letters? The bed that was
made? The clean coffee cups? The light in the bathroom? 
 We ve been very busy,  said Rick. We ve been busy at work, and we ve been working hard in our free time on
the house. We re forgetting things, that s all. 
 I hope so, Rick,  she said.  I hope so. 
They arrived home. Marilyn opened the door and turned on the light. There, on the hall table, was a neat pile of letters.
  Murder at the old farm
A week later there was another surprise, and this time they had a row. It was the worst row since they had got
married. They got home, as usual, at six o clock. Rick went into the living room.  Marilyn,  he said,  what s this? 
The ashtray, which was usually on the shelf near the radio, was on the coffee table. A cigarette end was in the ashtray.
 Who s been here?  said Rick.
Marilyn picked up the ashtray.  Look, Rick,  she said,  you told me that you had stopped smoking. You know
that I don t like smoking. 
 It s not mine,  he said.  I haven t had a cigarette for more than two years. Have you been home today? 
 No, I haven t,  she said.  But somebody has. I ve never smoked. You know that. 
She picked up the cigarette end. There was red lipstick on it. She showed it to Rick.
 A woman s been here,  she said.  What s happening, Rick? Who is she? 
 A woman ghost that smokes Marlboro cigarettes,  he said.
 It isn t funny, Rick,  she said. She went to the door.  I m going out for a walk. Don t come with me. I want to think. 
Marilyn walked along Balmoral Avenue. All the houses were the same. They had all been built two years
before. She walked round the corner into Osborne Way. There was one older house at the end of Osborne Way. It
had been there before the estate was built. An old man was working in the garden.
 Good evening,  said Marilyn.
 Good evening,  he replied.  It s a lovely evening, isn t it? 
 Yes,  she said.  Er ... have you lived here for a long time? 
 Oh, yes, my dear,  he said.  I ve been living here for thirty years. 
 Do you remember the old farm ... the one that used to be here before the estate was built? 
 High Trees Farm? Of course I do. I used to work there.  The old man walked over to her.
 Who lived there?  said Marilyn.
 Why are you interested in High Trees Farm?  he said. You re from one of the new houses, aren t you? 
 Er, yes,  said Marilyn.  I m very interested in history ... the history of this area. 
 Well, the farm belonged to old Giles Varley. He lived there by himself - since his wife died, that is. He was a
strange man. Nobody liked him very much. I didn t. He used to be a very difficult boss, you see. Everything had to
be in the right place. "Don t put that on the shelf!" he used to say to me. "Put it in the cupboard!" And the house . . .
I ve never seen a place as clean and tidy as that house. His wife had always been a very tidy woman, and he wanted
to keep the house the same. Yes, poor old Varley. 
 What happened to him?  said Marilyn.
 Don t you remember?  said the old man.  It was in all the newspapers six or seven years ago. 
 We didn t live in Sandbourne then,  said Marilyn.
  It was sad,  he said,  very sad. They never found the murderer, either. 
 The murderer?  said Marilyn.
 That s right. He was murdered in the old farmhouse. A robber, that s what the police thought. I found the body,
you know. 
Marilyn felt suddenly cold.  I see,  she said. Well, thank you. It s been very interesting. 
 Good night, then,  said the old man. Marilyn turned round and walked home very slowly.
When she got home, Rick was in the garden. They had bought a small tree at the weekend, and Rick was putting
it in the front garden. He called to her.
 Marilyn! Come here. Look at this! 
She walked over to him. There was a hole in the ground for the tree. There were a lot of old bricks in the hole.
 So,  he said,  there was a building here before they built this house. Do you think it was the old farmhouse? 
Marilyn felt cold.  Rick,  she said,  come inside. We ll have a cup of tea. I ve got something to tell you. 
  The ghost appears
A few days later, both Marilyn and Rick caught flu. They felt terrible all weekend. On Monday neither of them
felt well enough to go to work. They telephoned their offices, and decided to spend the day at home. It was a boring
day. They both had headaches, and they spent the day in the living room. Rick watched videos, Marilyn read a
book from the library, Ghosts of Sandbourne and East Wessex. At half past two Marilyn suddenly looked up.
 What s that?  she said.
They heard voices outside the front door. Then they heard the sound of a key in the lock. Rick jumped up.  What ...? 
They heard footsteps in the hall.
 It s a very nice hall.  It was a man s voice. Rick and Marilyn looked at each other. Then the living room door
began to open. Marilyn took Rick s hand. Two men and a woman walked into the room. They stopped in surprise.
 What are you doing here?  said Rick angrily.  Oh, I m terribly sorry,  said one of the men.  I thought you were out. 
He turned to the man and woman behind him.  Oh, this is Mr and Mrs Patterson. They re very interested in your house. 
 And who are you?  said Marilyn.
 Oh, I m sorry. Of couse we haven t met. I m Michael Webb. From Burchill and Bradley. I m very pleased to
meet you, Mrs Barclay. 
 I m not Mrs Barclay!  said Marilyn. The Barclays moved months ago. Last September. 
Rick was laughing.  Ah! I understand! You re the tidy ghost. 
Mr Webb looked worried.  The tidy ghost? I don t understand ... 
 Yes, the tidy ghost,  said Rick. He turned to Marilyn. The letters, the nightclothes, the newspaper ... 
Marilyn was laughing too.  ... the lipstick on the cigarette, the coffee cups, the bathroom light,  she said.
 I m sorry,  said Mr Webb,  I really don t understand. 
 We bought the house from the Barclays. We bought it through Norman and Naylor ... and you re from Burchill
and Bradley, the other estate agents!  said Marilyn.
 Oh, I see!  said Mr Webb. The Barclays never told us that the house had been sold. I ve been showing the house
to people for six months. I am sorry. The Barclays gave us a set of keys, and told us to show people the house when
they were at work. 
Marilyn smiled.  And you ve been tidying the house for us, haven t you?  she said.
Mr Webb looked uncomfortable and embarrassed. His face was going redder and redder.
 Er, yes,  he said.  You see, I usually arrive before the people that want to see the house. So ... I ve been coming
in and ... er, tidying things. 
 And the cigarette with lipstick?  said Marilyn.
 Yes, I m sorry about that. I brought a lady to see the house, Mrs Green. She wanted a cigarette while we were
talking about the house. I forgot to throw it away. I remembered later in the evening. Didn t you know that it was
someone looking at the house? 
 Well, no ... we didn t,  said Marilyn.
 Oh, dear,  said Mr Webb.  I hope there wasn t any trouble about it. 
 I thought ...  Marilyn looked at Rick.  I thought my husband ...  Then she felt sorry for Mr Webb, who was very
embarrassed.  I thought my husband had started smoking again,  she said.
Mr Webb remembered that Marilyn had said  the cigarette with lipstick . He went redder again.
 I m very, very sorry,  he said.
Marilyn smiled. She looked at Mr and Mrs Patterson, who were looking embarrassed too.
 It s a pity,  said Mrs Patterson.  It s a lovely house, and it s a lovely area. 
 Yes, well, it s my fault. I m sorry I ve wasted your time,  said Mr Webb.
 It isn t your fault,  Marilyn said. The Barclays didn t tell you they had moved. Look, can I get you all a cup of tea? 
 Yes, please take a seat,  said Rick.  I know that Mr and Mrs Collins at number twenty-nine are trying to sell
their house. It s just the same as this one. Perhaps we re going to be neighbours! 
Mr and Mrs Patterson sat down. Mr Patterson picked up Marilyn s book which was lying on the coffee table.
 Hmm,  he said,  Ghosts of Sandbourne and East Wessex. I hope there aren t any ghosts round here. 
  Oh, no,  said Marilyn,  there aren t any ghosts round here. They re all new houses. 
She went into the kitchen to make the tea. They had had a cup of tea and a sandwich an hour earlier, and she
hadn t washed up. There, on the kitchen table was the teapot, and a neat pile of plates and cups. She opened the
teapot. It was clean!
 But...  she said. Then she heard a laugh behind her. It was Rick.  Don t worry,  he said,  it was me. I came out
and washed up half an hour ago. Don t you remember? 
John R. R. Tolkien
The Hobbit
John R. R. Tolkien
The Hobbit
Chapter I
An Unexpected Party
In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit. Not a nasty, dirty, wet hole, filled with the ends of
worms and an oozy smell, nor yet a dry, bare, sandy hole with nothing in it to sit down on or to eat:
it was a hobbit-hole, and that means comfort.
It had a perfectly round door like a porthole, painted green, with a shiny yellow brass knob in
the exact middle. The door opened on to a tube-shaped hall like a tunnel: a very comfortable tunnel
without smoke, with panelled walls, and floors tiled and carpeted, provided with polished chairs,
and lots and lots of pegs for hats and coats – the hobbit was fond of visitors. The tunnel wound on
and on, going fairly but not quite straight into the side of the hill – The Hill, as all the people for
many miles round called it – and many little round doors opened out of it, first on one side and then
on another. No going upstairs for the hobbit: bedrooms, bathrooms, cellars, pantries (lots of these),
wardrobes (he had whole rooms devoted to clothes), kitchens, dining-rooms, all were on the same
floor, and indeed on the same passage. The best rooms were all on the left-hand side (going in), for
these were the only ones to have windows, deep-set round windows looking over his garden and
meadows beyond, sloping down to the river.
This hobbit was a very well-to-do hobbit, and his name was Baggins. The Bagginses had lived
in the neighbourhood of The Hill for time out of mind, and people considered them very
respectable, not only because most of them were rich, but also because they never had any
adventures or did anything unexpected: you could tell what a Baggins would say on any question
without the bother of asking him. This is a story of how a Baggins had an adventure, found himself
doing and saying things altogether unexpected. He may have lost the neighbours’ respect, but he
gained-well, you will see whether he gained anything in the end.
The mother of our particular hobbit... what is a hobbit? I suppose hobbits need some
description nowadays, since they have become rare and shy of the Big People, as they call us. They
are (or were) a little people, about half our height, and smaller than the bearded Dwarves. Hobbits
have no beards. There is little or no magic about them, except the ordinary everyday sort which
helps them to disappear quietly and quickly when large stupid folk like you and me come
blundering along, making a noise like elephants which they can hear a mile off. They are inclined to
be at in the stomach; they dress in bright colours (chiefly green and yellow); wear no shoes, because
their feet grow natural leathery soles and thick warm brown hair like the stuff on their heads (which
is curly); have long clever brown fingers, good-natured faces, and laugh deep fruity laughs
(especially after dinner, which they have twice a day when they can get it). Now you know enough
to go on with. As I was saying, the mother of this hobbit – of Bilbo Baggins, that is – was the
fabulous Belladonna Took, one of the three remarkable daughters of the Old Took, head of the
hobbits who lived across The Water, the small river that ran at the foot of The Hill. It was often said
(in other families) that long ago one of the Took ancestors must have taken a fairy wife. That was,
of course, absurd, but certainly there was still something not entirely hobbit-like about them, – and
once in a while members of the Took-clan would go and have adventures. They discreetly
disappeared, and the family hushed it up; but the fact remained that the Tooks were not as
respectable as the Bagginses, though they were undoubtedly richer. Not that Belladonna Took ever
had any adventures after she became Mrs. Bungo Baggins. Bungo, that was Bilbo’s father, built the
most luxurious hobbit-hole for her (and partly with her money) that was to be found either under
The Hill or over The Hill or across The Water, and there they remained to the end of their days. Stillit is probable that Bilbo, her only son, although he looked and behaved exactly like a second edition
of his solid and comfortable father, got something a bit queer in his makeup from the Took side,
something that only waited for a chance to come out. The chance never arrived, until Bilbo Baggins
was grown up, being about fifty years old or so, and living in the beautiful hobbit-hole built by his
father, which I have just described for you, until he had in fact apparently settled down immovably.
By some curious chance one morning long ago in the quiet of the world, when there was less
noise and more green, and the hobbits were still numerous and prosperous, and Bilbo Baggins was
standing at his door after breakfast smoking an enormous long wooden pipe that reached nearly
down to his woolly toes (neatly brushed) – Gandalf came by. Gandalf! If you had heard only a
quarter of what I have heard about him, and I have only heard very little of all there is to hear, you
would be prepared for any sort I of remarkable tale. Tales and adventures sprouted up all over the
place wherever he went, in the most extraordinary fashion. He had not been down that way under
The Hill for ages and ages, not since his friend the Old Took died, in fact, and the hobbits had
almost forgotten what he looked like. He had been away over The Hill and across The Water on
business of his own since they were all small hobbit-boys and hobbit-girls.
All that the unsuspecting Bilbo saw that morning was an old man with a staff. He had a tall
pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, a silver scarf over which a white beard hung down below his
waist, and immense black boots. “Good morning!” said Bilbo, and he meant it. The sun was
shining, and the grass was very green. But Gandalf looked at him from under long bushy eyebrows
that stuck out further than the brim of his shady hat. “What do you mean?” be said. “Do you wish
me a good morning, or mean that it is a good morning whether I want not; or that you feel good this
morning; or that it is morning to be good on?”
“All of them at once,” said Bilbo. “And a very fine morning for a pipe of tobacco out of
doors, into the bargain. If you have a pipe about you, sit down and have a fill of mine! There’s no
hurry, we have all the day before us!” Then Bilbo sat down on a seat by his door, crossed his legs,
and blew out a beautiful grey ring of smoke that sailed up into the air without breaking and floated
away over The Hill.
“Very pretty!” said Gandalf. “But I have no time to blow smoke-rings this morning. I am
looking for someone to share in an adventure that I am arranging, and it’s very difficult to find
anyone.”
I should think so – in these parts! We are plain quiet folk and have no use for adventures.
Nasty disturbing uncomfortable things! Make you late for dinner! I can’t think what anybody sees
in them, said our Mr. Baggins, and stuck one thumb behind his braces, and blew out another even
bigger smoke-ring. Then he took out his morning letters, and begin to read, pretending to take no
more notice of the old man. He had decided that he was not quite his sort, and wanted him to go
away. But the old man did not move. He stood leaning on his stick and gazing at the hobbit without
saying anything, till Bilbo got quite uncomfortable and even a little cross.
“Good morning!” he said at last. “We don’t want any adventures here, thank you! You might
try over The Hill or across The Water.” By this he meant that the conversation was at an end.
“What a lot of things you do use Good morning for!” said Gandalf. “Now you mean that you
want to get rid of me, and that it won’t be good till I move off.”
“Not at all, not at all, my dear sir! Let me see, I don’t think I know your name?”
“Yes, yes, my dear sir – and I do know your name, Mr. Bilbo Baggins. And you do know my
name, though you don’t remember that I belong to it. I am Gandalf, and Gandalf means me! To
think that I should have lived to be good-morninged by Belladonna Took’s son, as if I was selling
buttons at the door!” “Gandalf, Gandalf! Good gracious me! Not the wandering wizard that gave
Old Took a pair of magic diamond studs that fastened themselves and never came undone till
ordered? Not the fellow who used to tell such wonderful tales at parties, about dragons and goblins
and giants and the rescue of princesses and the unexpected luck of widows’ sons? Not the man that
used to make such particularly excellent fireworks! I remember those! Old Took used to have them
on Midsummer’s Eve. Splendid! They used to go up like great lilies and snapdragons and
laburnums of fire and hang in the twilight all evening!” You will notice already that Mr. Bagginswas not quite so prosy as he liked to believe, also that he was very fond of flowers. “Dear me!” she
went on. “Not the Gandalf who was responsible for so many quiet lads and lasses going off into the
Blue for mad adventures. Anything from climbing trees to visiting Elves – or sailing in ships,
sailing to other shores! Bless me, life used to be quite inter – I mean, you used to upset things badly
in these parts once upon a time. I beg your pardon, but I had no idea you were still in business.”
“Where else should I be?” said the wizard. “All the same I am pleased to find you remember
something about me. You seem to remember my fireworks kindly, at any rate, land that is not
without hope. Indeed for your old grand-father Took’s sake, and for the sake of poor Belladonna, I
will give you what you asked for.”
“I beg your pardon, I haven’t asked for anything!”
“Yes, you have! Twice now. My pardon. I give it you. In fact I will go so far as to send you on
this adventure. Very amusing for me, very good for you and profitable too, very likely, if you ever
get over it.”
“Sorry! I don’t want any adventures, thank you. Not today. Good morning!
But please come to tea – any time you like! Why not tomorrow? Come tomorrow!
Good-bye!”
With that the hobbit turned and scuttled inside his round green door, and shut it as quickly as
he dared, not to seen rude. Wizards after all are wizards.
“What on earth did I ask him to tea for!” he said to him-self, as he went
to the pantry. He had only just had break fast, but he thought a cake or two and a drink of
something would do him good after his fright. Gandalf in the meantime was still standing outside
the door, and laughing long but quietly. After a while he stepped up, and with the spike of his staff
scratched a queer sign on the hobbit’s beautiful green front-door. Then he strode away, just about
the time when Bilbo was finishing his second cake and beginning to think that he had escape
adventures very well.
The next day he had almost forgotten about Gandalf. He did not remember things very well,
unless he put them down on his Engagement Tablet: like this:
Gandalf ‘a Wednesday. Yesterday he had been too flustered to do anything of the kind. Just
before tea-time there came a tremendous ring on the front-door bell, and then he remembered! He
rushed and put on the kettle, and put out another cup and saucer and an extra cake or two, and ran to
the door. “I am so sorry to keep you waiting!” he was going to say, when he saw that it was not
Gandalf at all. It was a dwarf with a blue beard tucked into a golden belt, and very bright eyes under
his dark-green hood. As soon a the door was opened, he pushed inside, just as if he had been
expected. He hung his hooded cloak on the nearest peg, and “Dwalin at your service!” he said with
a low bow.
“Bilbo Baggins at yours!” said the hobbit, too surprised to ask any questions for the moment.
When the silence that followed had become uncomfortable, he added: “I am just about to take tea;
pray come and have some with me.” A little stiff perhaps, but he meant it kindly. And what would
you do, if an uninvited dwarf came and hung his things up in your hall without a word of
explanation?
They had not been at table long, in fact they had hardly reached the third cake, when there
came another even louder ring at the bell. “Excuse me!” said the hobbit, and off he went to the door.
“So you have got here at last!” was what he was going to say to Gandalf this time. But it was not
Gandalf. Instead there was a very old-looking dwarf on the step with a white beard and a scarlet
hood; and he too hopped inside as soon as the door was open, just as if he had been invited. “I see
they have begun to arrive already,” he said when he caught sight of Dwalin’s green hood hanging
up. He hung his red one next to it, and “Balin at your service!” he said with his hand on his breast.
“Thank you!” said Bilbo with a gasp. It was not the correct thing to say, but they have begun
to arrive had flustered him badly. He liked visitors, but he liked to know them before they arrived,
and he preferred to ask them himself. He had a horrible thought that the cakes might run short, and
then he-as the host: he knew his duty and stuck to it however painful-he might have to go without.
“Come along in, and have some tea!” he managed to say after taking a deep breath.“A little beer would suit me better, if it is all the same to you, my good sir,” said Balin with
the white beard. “But I don’t mind some cake-seed-cake, if you have any.”
“Lots!” Bilbo found himself answering, to his own surprise; and he found himself scuttling
off, too, to the cellar to fill a pint beer-mug, and to the pantry to fetch two beautiful round
seed-cakes which he had baked that afternoon for his after-supper morsel.
When he got back Balin and Dwalin were talking at the table like old friends (as a matter of
fact they were brothers). Bilbo plumped down the beer and the cake in front of them, when loud
came a ring at the bell again, and then another ring.
“Gandalf for certain this time,” he thought as he puffed along the passage. But it was not. It
was two more dwarves, both with blue hoods, silver belts, and yellow beards; and each of them
carried a bag of tools and a spade. In they hopped, as soon as the door began to open-Bilbo was
hardly surprised at all.
“What can I do for you, my dwarves?” he said. “Kili at your service!”
said the one. “And Fili!” added the other; and they both swept off their blue hoods and bowed.
“At yours and your family’s!” replied Bilbo, remembering his manners this time.
“Dwalin and Balin here already, I see,” said Kili. “Let us join the throng!”
“Throng!” thought Mr. Baggins. “I don’t like the sound of that. I really must sit down for a
minute and collect my wits, and have a drink.” He had only just had a sip-in the corner, while the
four dwarves sat around the table, and talked about mines and gold and troubles with the goblins,
and the depredations of dragons, and lots of other things which he did not understand, and did not
want to, for they sounded much too adventurous-when, ding-dong-a-ling-‘ dang, his bell rang again,
as if some naughty little hobbit-boy was trying to pull the handle off. “Someone at the door!” he
said, blinking. “Some four, I should say by the sound,” said Fili. “Be-sides, we saw them coming
along behind us in the distance.”
The poor little hobbit sat down in the hall and put his head in his hands, and wondered what
had happened, and what was going to happen, and whether they would all stay to supper. Then the
bell rang again louder than ever, and he had to run to the door. It was not four after all, it was FIVE.
Another dwarf had come along while he was wondering in the hall. He had hardly turned the knob,
be-x)re they were all inside, bowing and saying “at your service” one after another. Dori, Nori, Ori,
Oin, and Gloin were their names; and very soon two purple hoods, a grey hood, a brown hood, and
a white hood were hanging on the pegs, and off they marched with their broad hands stuck in their
gold and silver belts to join the others. Already it had almost become a throng. Some called for ale,
and some for porter, and one for coffee, and all of them for cakes; so the hobbit was kept very busy
for a while. A big jug of coffee bad just been set in the hearth, the seed-cakes were gone, and the
dwarves were starting on a round of buttered scones, when there came-a loud knock. Not a ring, but
a hard rat-tat on the hobbit’s beautiful green door. Somebody was banging with a stick!
Bilbo rushed along the passage, very angry, and altogether bewildered and bewuthered-this
was the most awkward Wednesday he ever remembered. He pulled open the door with a jerk, and
they all fell in, one on top of the other. More dwarves, four more! And there was Gandalf behind,
leaning on his staff and laughing. He had made quite a dent on the beautiful door; he had also, by
the way, knocked out the secret mark that he had put there the morning before. “Carefully!
Carefully!” he said. “It is not like you, Bilbo, to keep friends waiting on the mat, and then open the
door like a pop-gun! Let me introduce Bifur, Bofur, Bombur, and especially Thorin!” “At your
service!” said Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur standing in a row. Then they hung up two yellow hoods
and a pale green one; and also a sky-blue one with a long silver tassel. This last belonged to Thorin,
an enormously important dwarf, in fact no other than the great Thorin Oakenshield himself, who
was not at all pleased at falling flat on Bilbo’s mat with Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur on top of him.
For one thing Bombur was immensely fat and heavy. Thorin indeed was very haughty, and said
nothing about service; but poor Mr. Baggins said he was sorry so many times, that at last he grunted
“pray don’t mention it,” and stopped frowning.
“Now we are all here!” said Gandalf, looking at the row of thirteen hoods-the best detachable
party hoods-and his own hat hanging on the pegs. “Quite a merry gathering!I hope there is something left for the late-comers to eat and drink! What’s that? Tea! No thank
you! A little red wine, I think, for me.” “And for me,” said Thorin. “And raspberry jam and
apple-tart,” said Bifur. “And mince-pies and cheese,” said Bofur. “And pork-pie and salad,” said
Bombur. “And more cakes-and ale-and coffee, if you don’t mind,” called the other dwarves through
the door.
“Put on a few eggs, there’s a good fellow!” Gandalf called after him, as
the hobbit stumped off to the pantries. “And just bring out the cold chicken and pickles!”
“Seems to know as much about the inside of my larders as I do myself!” thought Mr. Baggins,
who was feeling positively flummoxed, and was beginning to wonder whether a most wretched
adventure had not come right into his house. By the time he had got all the bottles and dishes and
knives and forks and glasses and plates and spoons and things piled up on big trays, he was getting
very hot, and red in the face, and annoyed.
“Confusticate and bebother these dwarves!” he said aloud. “Why don’t they come and lend a
hand?” Lo and behold! there stood Balin and Dwalin at the door of the kitchen, and Fili and Kili
behind them, and before he could say knife they had whisked the trays and a couple of small tables
into the parlour and set out everything afresh.
Gandalf sat at the head of the party with the thirteen, dwarves all round: and Bilbo sat on a
stool at the fireside, nibbling at a biscuit (his appetite was quite taken away), and trying to look as if
this was all perfectly ordinary and. not in the least an adventure. The dwarves ate and ate, and talked
and talked, and time got on. At last they pushed their chairs back, and Bilbo made a move to collect
the plates and glasses. “I suppose you will all stay to supper?” he said in his politest unpressing
tones. “Of course!” said Thorin. “And after. We shan’t get through the business till late, and we
must have some music first. Now to clear up!” Thereupon the twelve dwarves-not Thorin, he was
too important, and stayed talking to Gandalf-jumped to their feet and made tall piles of all the
things. Off they went, not waiting for trays, balancing columns of plates, each with a bottle on the
top, with one hand, while the hobbit ran after them almost squeaking with fright: “please be
careful!” and “please, don’t trouble! I can manage.” But the dwarves only started to sing:
“Chip the glasses and crack the plates!
Blunt the knives and bend the forks!
That’s what Bilbo Baggins hates-
Smash the bottles and burn the corks!
Cut the cloth and tread on the fat!
Pour the milk on the pantry floor!
Leave the bones on the bedroom mat!
Splash the wine on every door!
Dump the crocks in a boiling bawl;
Pound them up with a thumping pole;
And when you’ve finished, if any are whole,
Send them down the hall to roll !
That’s what Bilbo Baggins hates!
So, carefully! carefully with the plates!”
And of course they did none of these dreadful things, and everything was cleaned and put
away safe as quick as lightning, while the hobbit was turning round and round in the middle of the
kitchen trying to see what they were doing. Then they went back, and found Thorin with his feet on
the fender smoking a pipe. He was blowing the most enormous smoke-rings, and wherever he told
one to go, it went-up the chimney, or behind the clock on the man-telpiece, or under the table, or
round and round the ceiling; but wherever it went it was not quick enough to escape Gandalf. Pop!
he sent a smaller smoke-ring from his short clay-pipe straight through each one of Thorin’s. The
Gandalf’s smoke-ring would go green and come back to hover over the wizard’s head. He had quite
a cloud of them about him already, and in the dim light it made him look strange and sorcerous.
Bilbo stood still and watched-he loved smoke-rings-and then be blushed to think how proud he had
been yesterday morning of the smoke-rings he had sent up the wind over The Hill. “Now for somemusic!” said Thorin. “Bring out the instruments!”
Kili and Fili rushed for their bags and brought back little fiddles;
Dori, Nori, and Ori brought out flutes from somewhere inside their coats; Bombur produced a
drum from the hall; Bifur and Bofur went out too, and came back with clarinets that they had left
among the walking-sticks Dwalin and Balin said: “Excuse me, I left mine in the porch!” “Just bring
mine in with you,” said Thorin. They came back with viols as big as themselves, and with Thorin’s
harp wrapped in a green cloth. It was a beautiful gold-en harp, and when Thorin struck it the music
began all at once, so sudden and sweet that Bilbo forgot everything else, and was swept away into
dark lands under strange moons, far over The Water and very far from his hobbit-hole under The
Hill. The dark came into the room from the little window that opened in the side of The Hill; the
firelight flickered-it was April-and still they played on, while the shadow of Gandalf’s beard
wagged against the wall. The dark filled all the room, and the fire died down, and the shadows were
lost, and still they played on. And suddenly first one and then another began to sing as they played,
deep-throated singing of the dwarves in the deep places of their ancient homes; and this is like a
fragment of their song, if it can be like their song without their music.
“Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away ere break of day
To seek the pale enchanted gold.
The dwarves of yore made mighty spells,
While hammers fell like ringing bells
In places deep, where dark things sleep,
In hollow halls beneath the fells.
For ancient king and elvish lord
There many a gloaming golden hoard
They shaped and wrought, and light they caught
To hide in gems on hilt of sword.
On silver necklaces they strung
The flowering stars, on crowns they hung
The dragon-fire, in twisted wire
They meshed the light of moon and sun.
Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away, ere break of day,
To claim our long-forgotten gold.
Goblets they carved there for themselves
And harps of gold; where no man delves
There lay they long, and many a song
Was sung unheard by men or elves.
The pines were roaring on the height,
The winds were moaning in the night.
The fire was red, it flaming spread;
The trees like torches biased with light,
The bells were ringing in the dale
And men looked up with faces pale;
The dragon’s ire more fierce than fire
Laid low their towers and houses frail.
The mountain smoked beneath the moon;
The dwarves, they heard the tramp of doom.
They fled their hall to dying -fall
Beneath his feet, beneath the moon.
Far over the misty mountains grimTo dungeons deep and caverns dim
We must away, ere break of day,
To win our harps and gold from him!”
As they sang the hobbit felt the love of beautiful things made by hands
and by cunning and by magic moving through him, a fierce and jealous love, the desire of the
hearts of dwarves. Then something Tookish woke up inside him, and he wished to go and see the
great mountains, and hear the pine-trees and the waterfalls, and explore the caves, and wear a sword
instead of a walking-stick. He looked out of the window. The stars were out in a dark sky above the
trees. He thought of the jewels of the dwarves shining in dark caverns. Suddenly in the wood
beyond The Water a flame leapt up–probably somebody lighting a wood-fire-and he thought of
plundering dragons settling on his quiet Hill and kindling it all to flames. He shuddered; and very
quickly he was plain Mr. Baggins of Bag-End, Under-Hill, again. He got up trembling. He had less
than half a mind to fetch the lamp, and more than half a mind to pretend to, and go and hide behind
the beer barrels in the cellar, and not come out again until all the dwarves had gone away. Suddenly
he found that the music and the singing had stopped, and they were all looking at him with eyes
shining in the dark.
“Where are you going?” said Thorin, in a tone that seemed to show that he guessed both
halves of the hobbit’s mind.
“What about a little light?” said Bilbo apologetically.
“We like the dark,” said the dwarves. “Dark for dark business! There are many hours before
dawn.”
“Of course!” said Bilbo, and sat down in a hurry. He missed the stool and sat in the fender,
knocking over the poker and shovel with a crash. “Hush!” said Gandalf. “Let Thorin speak!” And
this is bow Thorin began. “Gandalf, dwarves and Mr. Baggins! We are not together in the house of
our friend and fellow conspirator, this most excellent and audacious hobbit-may the hair on his toes
never fall out! all praise to his wine and ale!-“ He paused for breath and for a polite remark from the
hob-bit, but the compliments were quite lost on-poor Bilbo Baggins, who was wagging his mouth in
protest at being called audacious and worst of all fellow conspirator, though no noise came out, he
was so flummoxed. So Thorin went on:
“We are met to discuss our plans, our ways, means, policy and devices. We shall soon before
the break of day start on our long journey, a journey from which some of us, or perhaps all of us
(except our friend and counsellor, the ingenious wizard Gandalf) may never return. It is a solemn
moment. Our object is, I take it, well known to us all. To the estimable Mr. Baggins, and perhaps to
one or two of the younger dwarves (I think I should be right in naming Kili and Fili, for instance),
the exact situation at the moment may require a little brief explanation-“ This was Thorin’s style. He
was an important dwarf. If he had been allowed, he would probably have gone on like this until he
was out of breath, without telling any one there ‘anything that was not known already. But he was
rudely interrupted. Poor Bilbo couldn’t bear it any longer. At may never return he began to feel a
shriek coming up inside, and very soon it burst out like the whistle of an engine coming out of a
tunnel. All the dwarves sprang Bp knocking over the table. Gandalf struck a blue light on the end of
his magic staff, and in its firework glare the poor little hobbit could be seen kneeling on the
hearth-rug, shaking like a jelly that was melting. Then he fell flat on the floor, and kept on calling
out “struck by lightning, struck by lightning!” over and over again; and that was all they could get
out of him for a long time. So they took him and laid him out of the way on the drawing-room sofa
with a drink at his elbow, and they went back to their dark business.
“Excitable little fellow,” said Gandalf, as they sat down again. “Gets funny queer fits, but he
is one of the best, one of the best-as fierce as a dragon in a pinch.”
If you have ever seen a dragon in a pinch, you will realise that this was
only poetical exaggeration applied to any hobbit, even to Old Took’s great-
granduncle Bullroarer, who was so huge (for a hobbit) that he could ride a
horse. He charged the ranks of the goblins of Mount Gram in the Battle of the
Green Fields, and knocked their king Gol-firnbul’s head clean off with awooden club. It sailed a hundred yards through the air and went down a rabbit hole, and in
this way the battle was won and the game of Golf invented at the same moment.
In the meanwhile, however, Bullroarer’s gentler descendant was reviving in the
drawing-room. After a while and a drink he crept nervously to the door of the parlour. This is what
he heard, Gloin speaking: “Humph!” (or some snort more or less like that). “Will he do, do you
think? It is all very well for Gandalf to talk about this hobbit being fierce, but one shriek like that in
a moment of excitement would be enough to wake the dragon and all his relatives, and kill the lot of
us. I think it sounded more like fright than excitement! In fact, if it bad not been for the sign on the
door, I should have been sure we had come to the wrong house. As soon as I clapped eyes on the
little fellow bobbing and puffing on the mat, I had my doubts. He looks more like a grocer-than a
burglar!”
Then Mr. Baggins turned the handle and went in. The Took side had won. He suddenly felt he
would go without bed and breakfast to be thought fierce. As for little fellow bobbing on the mat it
almost made him really fierce. Many a time afterwards the Baggins part regretted what he did now,
and he said to himself: “Bilbo, you were a fool; you walked right in and put your foot in it.”
“Pardon me,” he said, “if I have overheard words that you were saying. I don’t pretend to
understand what you are talking about, or your reference to burglars, but I think I am right in
believing” (this is what he called being on his dignity) “that you think I am no good. I will show
you. I have no signs on my door-it was painted a week ago-, and I am quite sure you have come to
the wrong house. As soon as I saw your funny faces on the door-step, I had my doubts. But treat it
as the right one. Tell me what you want done, and I will try it, if I have to walk from here to the East
of East and fight the wild Were-worms in the Last Desert. I bad a great-great-great-granduncle once,
Bullroarer Took, and -“ “Yes, yes, but that was long ago,” said Gloin. “I was talking about you. And
I assure you there is a mark on this door-the usual one in the trade, or used to be. Burglar wants a
good job, plenty of Excitement and reasonable Reward, that’s how it is usually read. You ^an say
Expert Treasure-hunter instead of Burglar if you like. Some of them do. It’s all the same to us.
Gandalf told us that there was a man of the sort in these parts looking for a Job at once, and that he
had arranged for a meeting here this Wednesday tea-time.”
“Of course there is a mark,” said Gandalf. “I put it there myself. For very good reasons. You
asked me to find the fourteenth man for your expedition, and I chose Mr. Baggins. Just let any one
say I chose the wrong man or the wrong house, and you can stop at thirteen and have all the bad
luck you like, or go back to digging coal.”
He scowled so angrily at Gloin that the dwarf huddled back in his chair; and when Bilbo tried
to open his mouth to ask a question, he turned and frowned at him and stuck oat his bushy
eyebrows, till Bilbo shut his mouth tight with a snap. “That’s right,” said Gandalf. “Let’s have no
more argument. I have chosen Mr. Baggins and that ought to ! te enough for all of you. If I say he
is a Burglar, a Burglar he is, or will be when the time comes. There is a lot more in him than you
guess, and a deal more than he has any idea of himself. You may (possibly) all live to thank me yet.
Now Bilbo, my boy, fetch the lamp, and let’s have little light on this!”
On the table in the light of a big lamp with a red shad he spread a piece of parchment rather
like a map.
“This was made by Thror, your grandfather, Thorin, he said in answer to the dwarves’ excited
questions. “It is a plan of the Mountain.” “I don’t see that this will help us much,” said Thorin
disappointedly after a glance. “I remember the Mountain well enough and the lands about it. And I
know where Mirkwood is, and the Withered Heath where the great dragons bred.”
“There is a dragon marked in red on the Mountain, said Balin, “but it will be easy enough to
find him without that, if ever we arrive there.” “There is one point that you haven’t noticed,” said
the wizard, “and that is the secret entrance. You see that rune on the West side, and the hand
pointing to it from the other runes? That marks a hidden passage to the Lower Halls.
“It may have been secret once,” said Thorin, “but how do we know that it is secret any
longer? Old Smaug had lived there long enough now to find out anything there is to know about
those caves.”“He may-but he can’t have used it for years and years. “Why?” “Because it is too small. ‘Five
feet high the door and three may walk abreast’ say the runes, but Smaug could not creep into a hole
that size, not even when he was a young dragon, certainly not after devouring so many of the
dwarves and men of Dale.”
“It seems a great big hole to me,” squeaked Bilbo (who had no experience of dragons and
only of hobbit-holes) He was getting excited and interested again, so that he forgot to keep his
mouth shut. He loved maps, and in his hall there hung a large one of the Country Round with all his
favourite walks marked on it in red ink. “How could such a large door be kept secret from
everybody outside, apart from the dragon?” he asked. He was only a little hobbit you must
remember.
“In lots of ways,” said Gandalf. “But in what way this one has been hidden we don’t know
without going to see. From what it says on the map I should guess there is a closed door which has
been made to look exactly like the side of the Mountain. That is the usual dwarves’ method– I think
that is right, isn’t it?” “Quite right,” said Thorin.
“Also,” went on Gandalf, “I forgot to mention that with the map went a key, a small and
curious key. Here it is!” he said, and handed to Thorin a key with a long barrel and intricate wards,
made of silver. “Keep it safe!” “Indeed I will,” said Thorin, and he fastened it upon a fine chain that
hung about his neck and under his jacket. “Now things begin to look more hopeful. This news alters
them much for-the better. So far we have had no clear idea what to do. We thought of going East, as
quiet and careful as we could, as far as the Long Lake. After that the trouble would begin.” “A long
time before that, if I know anything about the loads East,” interrupted Gandalf.
“We might go from there up along the River Running,” went on Thorin taking no notice, “and
so to the ruins of Dale-the old town in the valley there, under the shadow of the Mountain. But we
none of us liked the idea of the Front Gate. The river runs right out of it through the great cliff at the
South of the Mountain, and out of it comes the dragon too-far too often, unless he has changed.”
“That would be no good,” said the wizard, “not without a mighty Warrior, even a Hero. I tried
to find one; but warriors are busy fighting one another in distant lands, and in this neighbourhood
heroes are scarce, or simply lot to be found. Swords in these parts are mostly blunt, and axes are
used for trees, and shields as cradles or dish-covers; and dragons are comfortably far-off (and
therefore legendary). That is why I settled on burglary-especially when I remembered the existence
of a Side-door. And here is our little Bilbo Baggins, the burglar, the chosen and selected burglar. So
now let’s get on and make some plans.”
“Very well then,” said Thorin, “supposing the burglar-expert gives us some ideas or
suggestions.” He turned with mock-politeness to Bilbo. “First I should like to know a bit more
about things,” said he, feeling all confused and a bit shaky inside, but so far still lookishly
determined to go on with things. “I mean about the gold and the dragon, and all that, and how it got
there, and who it belongs to, and so on and further.” “Bless me!” said Thorin, “haven’t you got a
map? and didn’t you hear our song? and haven’t we been talking about all this for hours?”
“All the same, I should like it all plain and clear,” said he
obstinately, putting on his business manner (usually reserved for people who tried to borrow
money off him), and doing his best to appear wise and prudent and professional and live up to
Gandalf’s recommendation. “Also I should like to know about risks, out-of-pocket expenses, time
required and remuneration, and so forth”-by which he meant: “What am I going to get out of it? and
am I going to come back alive?”
“O very well,” said Thorin. “Long ago in my grandfather Thror’s time our family was driven
out of the far North, and came back with all their wealth and their tools to this Mountain on the
map. It had been discovered by my far ancestor, Thrain the Old, but now they mined and they
tunnelled and they made huger halls and greater workshops -and in addition I believe they found a
good deal of gold and a great many jewels too. Anyway they grew immensely rich and famous, and
my grandfather was King under the Mountain again and treated with great reverence by the mortal
men, who lived to the South, and were gradually spreading up the Running River as far as the valley
overshadowed by the Mountain. They built the merry town of Dale there in those days. Kings usedto send for our smiths, and reward even the least skilful most richly. Fathers would beg us to take
their sons as apprentices, and pay us handsomely, especially in food-supplies, which we never
bothered to grow or find for ourselves. Altogether those were good days for us, and the poorest of
us had money to spend and to lend, and leisure to make beautiful things just for the. fun of it, not to
speak of the most marvellous and magical toys, the like of which is not to be found in the world
now-a-days. So my grandfather’s halls became full of armour and jewels and carvings and cups,
and the toy-market of Dale was the wonder of the North.
“Undoubtedly that was what brought the dragon. Dragons steal gold and jewels, you know,
from men and elves and dwarves, wherever they can find them; and they guard their plunder as long
as they live (which is practically forever, unless they are killed), and never enjoy a brass ring of it.
Indeed they hardly know a good bit of work from a bad, though they usually have a good notion of
the current market value; and they can’t make a thing for themselves, not even mend a little loose
scale of their armour. There were lots of dragons in the North in those days, and gold was probably
getting scarce up there, with the dwarves flying south or getting killed, and all the general waste and
destruction that dragons make going from bad to worse. There was a most specially greedy, strong
and wicked worm called Smaug. One day he flew up into the air and came south. The first we heard
of it was a noise like a hurricane coming from the North, and the pine-trees on the Mountain
creaking and cracking in the wind. Some of the dwarves who happened to be outside (I was one
luckily -a fine adventurous lad in those days, always wandering about, and it saved my life that
day)-well, from a good way off we saw the dragon settle on our mountain in a spout of flame. Then
he came down the slopes and when he reached the woods they all went up in fire. By that time all
the bells were ringing in Dale and the warriors were arming. The dwarves rushed out of their great
gate; but there was the dragon waiting for them. None escaped that way. The river rushed up in
steam and a fog fell on Dale, and in the fog the dragon came on them and destroyed most of the
warriors-the usual unhappy story, it was only too common in those days. Then he went back and
crept in through the Front Gate and routed out all the halls, and lanes, and tunnels, alleys, cellars,
mansions and passages. After that there were no dwarves left alive inside, and he took all their
wealth for himself. Probably, for that is the dragons’ way, he has piled it all up in a great heap far
inside, and sleeps on it for a bed. Later he used to crawl out of the great gate and come by night to
Dale, and carry away people, especially maidens, to eat, until Dale was ruined, and all the people
dead or gone. What goes on there now I don’t know for certain, but I don’t suppose anyone lives
nearer to the Mountain than the far edge of the Long Lake now-a-days.
“The few of us that were well outside sat and wept in hiding, and cursed Smaug; and there we
were unexpectedly joined by my father and my grandfather with singed beards. They looked very
grim but they said very little. When I asked how they had got away, they told me to hold my tongue,
and said that one day in the proper time I should know. After that we went away, and we have had
to earn our livings as best we could up and down the lands, often enough sinking as low as
blacksmith-work or even coalmining. But we have never forgotten our stolen treasure. And even
now, when I will allow we have a good bit laid by and are not so badly off”-here Thorin stroked the
gold chain round his neck-“we still mean to get it back, and to bring our curses home to Smaug-if
we can.
“I have often wondered about my father’s and my grandfather’s escape. I see now they must
have had a private Side-door which only they knew about. But apparently they made a map, and I
should like to know how Gandalf got hold of it, and why it did not come down to me, the rightful
heir.” “I did not ‘get hold of it,’ I was given it,” said the wizard. “Your grandfather Thror was killed,
you remember, in the mines of Moria by Azog the Goblin -“ “Curse his name, yes,” said Thorin.
“And Thrain your father went away on the twenty-first of April, a hundred years ago last
Thursday, and has never been seen by you since-“ “True, true,” said Thorin.
“Well, your father gave me this to give to you; and if I have chosen my own time and way of
handing it over, you can hardly blame me, considering the trouble I had to find you. Your father
could not remember his own name when he gave me the paper, and he never told me yours; so on
the whole I think I ought to be praised and thanked. Here it is,” said he handing the map to Thorin.“I don’t understand,” said Thorin, and Bilbo felt he would have liked to say the same. The
explanation did not seem to explain. “Your grandfather,” said the wizard slowly and grimly, “gave
the map to his son for safety before he went to the mines of Moria. Your father went away to try his
luck with the map after your grandfather was killed; and lots of adventures of a most unpleasant sort
he had, but he never got near the Mountain. How he got there I don’t know, but I found him a
prisoner in the dungeons of the Necromancer.”
“Whatever were you doing there?” asked Thorin with a shudder, and all the dwarves shivered.
“Never you mind. I was finding things out, as usual; and a nasty dangerous business it was.
Even I, Gandalf, only just escaped. I tried to save your father, but it was too late. He was witless and
wandering, and had forgotten almost everything except the map and the key.” “We have long ago
paid the goblins of Moria,” said Thorin; “we must give a thought to the Necromancer.” “Don’t be
absurd! He is an enemy quite beyond the powers of all the dwarves put together, if they could all be
collected again from the four corners of the world. The one thing your father wished was for his son
to read the map and use the key. The dragon and the Mountain are more than big enough tasks for
you!”
“Hear, hear!” said Bilbo, and accidentally said it aloud, “Hear what?” they all said turning
suddenly towards him, and he was so flustered that he answered “Hear what I have got to say!”
“What’s that?” they asked. “Well, I should say that you ought to go East and have a look round.
After all there is the Side-door, and dragons must sleep sometimes, I suppose.
If you sit on the doorstep long enough, I daresay you will think of something. And well, don’t
you know, I think we have talked long enough for one night, if you see what I mean. What about
bed, and an early start, and all that? I will give you a good breakfast before you go.”
“Before we go, I suppose you mean,” said Thorin. “Aren’t you the burglar? And isn’t sitting
on the door-step your job, not to speak of getting inside the door? But I agree about bed and
breakfast. I like eggs with my ham, when starting on a journey: fried not poached, and mind you
don’t break ‘em.”
After all the others had ordered their breakfasts without so much as a please (which annoyed
Bilbo very much), they all got up. The hobbit had to find room for them all, and filled all his
spare-rooms and made beds on chairs and sofas, before he got them all stowed and went to his own
little bed very tired and not altogether happy. One thing he did make his mind up about was not to
bother to get up very early and cook everybody else’s wretched breakfast. The Tookishness was
wearing off, and he was not now quite so sure that he was going on any journey in the morning. As
he lay in bed he could hear Thorin still humming to himself in the best bedroom next to him:
“Far over the misty mountains cold
To dungeons deep and caverns old
We must away, ere break of day,
To find our long-forgotten gold.”
Bilbo went to sleep with that in his ears, and it gave him very uncomfortable dreams. It was
long after the break of day, when he woke up.
Chapter  
Roast Mutton
Up jumped Bilbo, and putting on his dressing-gown went into the dining-room. There he saw
nobody, but all the signs of a large and hurried breakfast. There was a fearful mess in the room, and
piles of unwashed crocks in the kitchen. Nearly every pot and pan he possessed seemed to have
been used. The washing-up was so dismally real that Bilbo was forced to believe the party of the
night before had not been part of his bad dreams, as he had rather hoped. Indeed he was really
relieved after all to think that they had all gone without him, and without bothering to wake him up
(“but with never a thank-you” he thought); and yet in a way he could not help feeling just a trifle
disappointed. The feeling surprised him.
“Don’t be a fool, Bilbo Baggins!” he said to himself, “thinking of dragons and all thatoutlandish nonsense at your age!” So be put on an apron, lit fires, boiled water, and washed up.
Then he had a nice little breakfast in the kitchen before turning out the dining-room. By that time
the sun was shining; and the front door was open, letting in a warm spring breeze. Bilbo began to
whistle loudly and to forget about the night before. In fact he was just sitting down to a nice little
second breakfast in the dining-room by the open window, when in walked Gandalf. “My dear
fellow,” said he, “whenever are you going to come? What about an early start?-and here you are
having breakfast, or whatever you call it, at half past ten! They left you the message, because they
could not wait.”
“What message?” said poor Mr. Baggins all in a fluster. “Great Elephants!” said Gandalf,
“you are not at all yourself this morning-you have never dusted the mantel– piece!”
“What’s that got to do with it? I have had enough to do with washing up for fourteen!”
“If you had dusted the mantelpiece you would have found this just under the clock,” said
Gandalf, handing Bilbo a note (written, of course, on his own note-paper).
This is what he read:
“Thorin and Company to Burglar Bilbo greeting!
For your hospitality our sincerest thanks, and for your offer of professional assistance our
grateful acceptance. Terms: cash on delivery, up to and not exceeding one fourteenth of total profits
(if any); all traveling expenses guaranteed in any event; funeral expenses to be defrayed by us or
our representatives, if occasion arises and the matter is not otherwise arranged for.
“Thinking it unnecessary to disturb your esteemed repose, we have proceeded in advance to
make requisite preparations, and shall await your respected person at the Green Dragon Inn,
Bywater, at II a.m. sharp. Trusting that you will be punctual.
“We have the honour to remain
“Yours deeply
“Thorin & Co.”
“That leaves you just ten minutes. You will have to run,” said Gandalf.
“But-“ said Bilbo.
“No time for it,” said the wizard.
“But-“said Bilbo again.
“No time for that either! Off you go!”
To the end of his days Bilbo could never remember how he found himself outside, without a
hat, walking-stick or say money, or anything that he usually took when he went out; leaving his
second breakfast half-finished and quite unwashed-up, pushing his keys into Gandalf’s hands, and
running as fast as his furry feet could carry him down the lane, past the great Mill, across The
Water, and then on for a whole mile or more. Very puffed he was, when he got to Bywater just on
the stroke of eleven, and found he had come without a pocket-handkerchief!
“Bravo!” said Balin who was standing at the inn door looking out for him. Just then all the
others came round the corner of the road from the village. They were on ponies, and each pony was
slung about with all kinds of baggages, packages, parcels, and paraphernalia. There was a very
small pony, apparently for Bilbo.
“Up you two get, and off we go!” said Thorin.
“I’m awfully sorry,” said Bilbo, “but I have come without my hat, and I have left my
pocket-handkerchief behind, and I haven’t got any money. I didn’t get your note until after   .   to
be precise.”
“Don’t be precise,” said Dwalin, “and don’t worry! You will have to manage without
pocket-handkerchiefs, and a good many other things, before you get to the journey’s end. As for a
hat, I have got a spare hood and cloak in my luggage.”
That’s how they all came to start, jogging off from the inn one fine morning just before May,
on laden ponies; and Bilbo was wearing a dark-green hood (a little weather-stained) and a
dark-green cloak borrowed from Dwalin. They were too large for him, and he looked rather comic.
What his father Bungo would have thought of him, I daren’t think. His only comfort was he
couldn’t be mistaken for a dwarf, as he had no beard.They had not been riding very long when up came Gandalf very splendid on a white horse. He
had brought a lot of pocket-handkerchiefs, and Bilbo’s pipe and tobacco. So after that the party
went along very merrily, and they told stories or sang songs as they rode forward all day, except of
course when they stopped for meals. These didn’t come quite as often as Bilbo would have liked
them, but still he began to feel that adventures were not so bad after all. At first they had passed
through hobbit-lands, a wild respectable country inhabited by decent folk, with good roads, an inn
or two, and now and then a dwarf or a farmer ambling by on business. Then they came to lands
where people spoke strangely, and sang songs Bilbo had never heard before. Now they had gone on
far into the Lone-lands, where there were no people left, no inns, and the roads grew steadily worse.
Not far ahead were dreary hills, rising higher and higher, dark with trees. On some of them were old
castles with an evil look, as if they had been built by wicked people. Everything seemed gloomy, for
the weather that day had taken a nasty turn. Mostly it had been as good as May can be, even in
merry tales, but now it was cold and wet. In the Lone-lands they had to camp when they could, but
at least it had been dry. “To think it will soon be June,” grumbled Bilbo as he splashed along behind
the others in a very muddy track. It was after tea-time; it was pouring with rain, and had been all
day; his hood was dripping into his eyes, his cloak was full of water; the pony was tired and
stumbled on stones; the others were too grumpy to talk. “And I’m sure the rain has got into the dry
clothes and into the food-bags,” thought Bilbo. “Bother burgling and everything to do with it! I
wish I was at home in my nice hole by the fire, with the kettle just beginning to sing!” It was not the
last time that he wished that! Still the dwarves jogged on, never turning round or taking any notice
of the hobbit. Somewhere behind the grey clouds the sun must have gone down, for it began to get
dark. Wind got up, and the willows along the river-bank bent and sighed. I don’t know what river it
was, a rushing red one, swollen with the rains of the last few days, that came down from the hills
and mountains in front of them. Soon it was nearly dark. The winds broke up the grey clouds, and a
waning moon appeared above the hills between the flying rags. Then they stopped, and Thorin
muttered something about supper, “and where shall we get a dry patch to sleep on?” Not until then
did they notice that Gandalf was missing. So far he had come all the way with them, never saying if
he was in the adventure or merely keeping them company for a while. He had eaten most, talked
most, and laughed most. But now he simply was not there at all! “Just when a wizard would have
been most useful, too,” groaned Dori and Nori (who shared the hobbit’s views about regular meals,
plenty and often). They decided in the end that they would have to camp where they were. So far
they had not camped before on this journey, and though they knew that they soon would have to
camp regularly, when they were among the Misty Mountains and far from the lands of respectable
people, it seemed a bad wet evening to begin, on. They moved to a clump of trees, and though it
was drier under them, the wind shook the rain off the leaves, and the drip, drip, was most annoying.
Also the mischief seemed to have got into the fire. Dwarves can make a fire almost anywhere out of
almost anything, wind or no wind; but they could not do it that night, not even Oin and Gloin, who
were specially good at it. Then one of the ponies took fright at nothing and bolted. He got into the
river before they could catch him; and before they could get him out again, Fili and Kili were nearly
drowned, and all the baggage that he carried was washed away off him. Of course it was mostly
food, and there was mighty little left for supper, and less for breakfast. There they all sat glum and
wet and muttering, while Oin and Gloin went on trying to light the fire, and quarrelling about it.
Bilbo was sadly reflecting that adventures are not all pony-rides in May-sunshine, when Balin, who
was always their look-out man, said: “There’s a light over there!” There was a hill some way off
with trees on it, pretty thick in parts. Out of the dark mass of the trees they could now see a light
shining, a reddish comfortable-looking light, as it might be a fire or torches twinkling. When they
had looked at it for some while, they fell to arguing. Some said “no” and some said “yes.” Some
said they could but go and see, and anything was better than little supper, less breakfast, and wet
clothes all the night. Others said: “These parts are none too well known, and are too near the
mountains. Travellers seldom come this way now. The old maps are no use: things have changed for
the worse and the road is unguarded. They have seldom even heard of the king round here, and the
less inquisitive you are as you go along, the less trouble you are likely to find.” Some said:“After all there are fourteen of us.” Others said: “Where has Gandalf got to?” This remark
was repeated by everybody. Then the rain began to pour down worse than ever, and Oin and Gloin
began to fight. That settled it. “After all we have got a burglar with us,” they said; and so they made
off, leading their ponies (with all due and proper caution) in the direction of the light. They came to
the hill and were soon in the wood. Up the hill they went; but there was no proper path to be seen,
such as might lead to a house or a farm; and do what they could they made a deal of rustling and
crackling and creaking (and a good deal of grumbling and drafting), as they went through the trees
in the pitch dark.
Suddenly the red light shone out very bright through the tree-trunks not far ahead. “Now it is
the burglar’s turn,” they said, meaning Bilbo. “You must go on and find out all about that light, and
what it is for, and if all is perfectly safe and canny,” said Thorin to the hobbit. “Now scuttle off, and
come back quick, if all is well. If not, come back if you can! It you can’t, hoot twice like a barn-owl
and once like a screech-owl, and we will do what we can.”
Off Bilbo had to go, before he could explain that he could not hoot even once like any kind of
owl any more than fly like a bat. But at any rate hobbits can move quietly in woods, absolutely
quietly. They take a pride in it, and Bilbo had sniffed more than once at what he called “all this
dwarvish racket,” as they went along, though I don’t sup-pose you or I would notice anything at all
on a windy night, not if the whole cavalcade had passed two feet off. As for Bilbo walking primly
towards the red light, I don’t suppose even a weasel would have stirred a whisker at it. So, naturally,
he got right up to the fire-for fire it was without disturbing anyone. And this is what he saw. Three
very large persons sitting round a very large fire of beech-logs. They were toasting mutton on long
spits of wood, and licking the gravy off their fingers. There was a fine toothsome smell. Also there
was a barrel of good drink at hand, and they were drinking out of jugs. But they were trolls.
Obviously trolls. Even Bilbo, in spite of his sheltered life, could see that:
from the great heavy faces of them, and their size, and the shape of their legs, not to mention
their language, which was not drawing-room fashion at all, at all.
“Mutton yesterday, mutton today, and blimey, if it don’t look like mutton again tomorrow,”
said one of the trolls.
“Never a blinking bit of manflesh have we had for long enough,” said a second. “What the ‘ell
William was a-thinkin’ of to bring us into these parts at all, beats me – and the drink runnin’ short,
what’s more,” he said jogging the elbow of William, who was taking a pull at his jug. William
choked. “Shut yer mouth!” he said as soon as he could. “Yer can’t expect folk to stop here for ever
just to be et by you and Bert. You’ve et a village and a half between yer, since we come down from
the mountains. How much more d’yer want? And time’s been up our way, when yer’d have said
‘thank yer Bill’ for a nice bit o’ fat valley mutton like what this is.” He took a big bite off a sheep’s
leg he was toasting, and wiped his lips on his sleeve. Yes, I am afraid trolls do behave like that, even
those with only one head each. After hearing all this Bilbo ought to have done something at once.
Either he should have gone back quietly and warned his friends that there were three fair-sized trolls
at hand in a nasty mood, quite likely to try toasted dwarf, or even pony, for a change; or else he
should have done a bit of good quick burgling. A really first-class and legendary burglar would at
this point have picked the trolls’ pockets-it is nearly always worthwhile if you can manage it-,
pinched the very mutton off the spite, purloined the beer, and walked off without their noticing him.
Others more practical but with less professional pride would perhaps have stuck a dagger into each
of them before they observed it. Then the night could have been spent cheerily. Bilbo knew it. He
had read of a good many things he had never seen or done. He was very much alarmed, as well as
disgusted; he wished himself a hundred miles away, and yet-and yet somehow he could not go
straight back to Thorin and Company empty-handed. So he stood and hesitated in the shadows. Of
the various burglarious proceedings he had heard of picking the trolls’ pockets seemed the least
difficult, so at last he crept behind a tree just behind William.
Bert and Tom went off to the barrel. William was having another drink. Then Bilbo plucked
up courage and put his little hand in William’s enormous pocket. There was a purse in it, as big as a
bag to Bilbo. “Ha!” thought he warming to his new work as he lifted it carefully out, “this is abeginning!” It was! Trolls’ purses are the mischief, and this was no exception. “ ‘Ere, ‘oo are you?”
it squeaked, as it left the pocket; and William turned round at once and grabbed Bilbo by the neck,
before he could duck behind the tree.
“Blimey, Bert, look what I’ve copped!” said William.
“What is it?” said the others coming up.
“Lumme, if I knows! What are yer?”
“Bilbo Baggins, a bur– a hobbit,” said poor Bilbo, shaking all over, and wondering how to
make owl-noises before they throttled him. “A burrahobbit?” said they a bit startled. Trolls are slow
in the uptake, and mighty suspicious about anything new to them.
“What’s a burrahobbit got to do with my pocket, anyways?” said William.
“And can yer cook ‘em?” said Tom.
“Yer can try,” said Bert, picking up a skewer.
“He wouldn’t make above a mouthful,” said William, who had already had a fine supper, “not
when he was skinned and boned.”
“P’raps there are more like him round about, and we might make a pie,” said Bert. “Here you,
are there any more of your sort a-sneakin’ in these here woods, yer nassty little rabbit,” said he
looking at the hobbit’s furry feet; and he picked him up by the toes and shook him.
“Yes, lots,” said Bilbo, before he remembered not to give his friends away. “No, none at all,
not one,” he said immediately afterwards. “What d’yer mean?” said Bert, holding him right away
up, by the hair this time.
“What I say,” said Bilbo gasping. “And please don’t cook me, kind sirs! I am a good cook
myself, and cook bet-ter than I cook, if you see what I mean. I’ll cook beautifully for you, a
perfectly beautiful breakfast for you, if only you won’t have me for supper.”
“Poor little blighter,” said William. He had already had as much supper as he could hold; also
he had had lots of beer. “Poor little blighter! Let him go!”
“Not till he says what he means by lots and none at all,” said Bert. “I don’t want to have me
throat cut in me sleep. Hold his toes in the fire, till he talks!”
“I won’t have it,” said William. “I caught him anyway.” “You’re a fat fool, William,” said
Bert, “as I’ve said afore this evening.”
“And you’re a lout!”
“And I won’t take that from you. Bill Huggins,” says Bert, and puts his fist in William’s eye.
Then there was a gorgeous row. Bilbo had just enough wits left, when Bert dropped him on
the ground, to scramble out of the way of their feet, before they were fighting like dogs, and calling
one another all sorts of perfectly true and applicable names in very loud voices. Soon they were
locked in one another’s arms, and rolling nearly into the fire kicking and thumping, while Tom
whacked at then both with a branch to bring them to their senses-and that of course only made them
madder than ever. That would have been the time for Bilbo to have left. But his poor little feet had
been very squashed in Bert’s big paw, and he had no breath in his body, and his head was going
round; so there he lay for a while panting, just outside the circle of firelight. Right in the middle of
the fight up came Balin. The dwarves had heard noises from a distance, and after wait-ing for some
time for Bilbo to come back, or to hoot like an owl, they started off one by one to creep towards the
light as quietly as they could. No sooner did Tom see Balin come into the light than he gave an
awful howl. Trolls simply detest the very sight of dwarves (uncooked). Bert and Bill stopped
fighting immediately, and “a sack, Tom, quick!” they said, before Balin, who was wondering where
in all this commotion Bilbo was, knew what was happening, a sack was over his head, and he was
down.
“There’s more to come yet,” said Tom, “or I’m mighty mistook. Lots and none at all, it is,”
said he. “No burra– hobbits, but lots of these here dwarves. That’s about the shape of it!”
“I reckon you’re right,” said Bert, “and we’d best get out of the light.”
And so they did. With sacks in their hands, that they used for carrying off mutton and other
plunder, they waited in the shadows. As each dwarf came up and looked at the fire, and the spilled
jugs, and the gnawed mutton, in surprise, pop! went a nasty smelly sack over his head, and he wasdown. Soon Dwalin lay by Balin, and Fili and Kili together, and Dori and Nori and Ori all in a heap,
and Oin and Gloin and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur piled uncomfortably near the fire.
“That’ll teach ‘em,” said Tom; for Bifur and Bombur had given a lot of trouble, and fought
like mad, as dwarves will when cornered. Thorin came last-and he was not caught unawares. He
came expecting mischief, and didn’t need to see his friends’ legs sticking out of sacks to tell him
that things were not all well. He stood outside in the shadows some way off, and said: “What’s all
this trouble? Who has been knocking my people about?”
“It’s trolls!” said Bilbo from behind a tree. They had forgotten all about him. “They’re hiding
in the bushes with sacks,” said he. “O! are they?” said Thorin, and he jumped forward to the fire,
before they could leap on him. He caught up a big branch all on fire at one end; and Bert got that
end in his eye before he could step aside. That put him out of the battle for a bit. Bilbo did his best.
He caught hold of Tom’s leg-as well as he could, it was thick as a young tree-trunk -but he was sent
spinning up into the top of some bushes, when Tom kicked the sparks up in Thorin’s face. Tom got
the branch in his teeth for that, and lost one of the front ones. It made him howl, I can tell you. But
just at that moment William came up behind and popped a sack right over Thorin’s head and down
to his toes. And so the fight ended. A nice pickle they were all in now: all neatly tied up in sacks,
with three angry trolls (and two with burns and bashes to remember) sitting by them, arguing
whether they should roast them slowly, or mince them fine and boil them, or just sit on them one by
one and squash them into jelly: and Bilbo up in a bush, with his clothes and his skin torn, not daring
to move for fear they should hear him.
It was just then that Gandalf came back. But no one saw him. The trolls had just decided to
roast the dwarves now and eat them later-that was Bert’s idea, and after a lot of argument they had
all agreed to it. “No good roasting ‘em now, it’d take all night,” said a voice. Bert thought it was
William’s.
“Don’t start the argument all over-again. Bill,” he said, “or it will take all night.”
“Who’s a-arguing?” said William, who thought it was. Bert that had spoken.
“You are,” said Bert.
“You’re a liar,” said William; and so the argument beg all over again. In the end they decided
to mince them fine and boil them. So they got a black pot, and they took out their knives.
“No good boiling ‘em! We ain’t got no water, and it’s a long way to the well and all,” said a
voice. Bert and William thought it was Tom’s. “Shut up!” said they, “or we’ll never have done. And
yer can fetch the water yerself, if yer say any more.”
“Shut up yerself!” said Tom, who thought it was William’s voice. “Who’s arguing but you. I’d
like to know.”
“You’re a booby,” said William.
“Booby yerself!” said Tom.
And so the argument began all over again, and went on hotter than ever, until at last they
decided to sit on the sacks one by one and squash them, and boil them next time.
“Who shall we sit on first?” said the voice.
“Better sit on the last fellow first,” said Bert, whose eye had been damaged by Thorin. He
thought Tom was talking.
“Don’t talk to yerself!” said Tom. “But if you wants to sit on the last one, sit on him. Which is
he?”
“The one with the yellow stockings,” said Bert.
“Nonsense, the one with the grey stockings,” said a voice like William’s.
“I made sure it was yellow,” said Bert.
“Yellow it was,” said William.
“Then what did yer say it was grey for?” said Bert.
“I never did. Tom said it.”
“That I never did!” said Tom. “It was you.”
“Two to one, so shut yer mouth!” said Bert.
“Who are you a-talkin’ to?” said William.“Now stop it!” said Tom and Bert together. “The night’s gettin’ on, and dawn comes early.
Let’s get on with it!”
“Dawn take you all, and be stone to you!” said a voice that sounded like William’s. But it
wasn’t. For just at that moment the light came over the hill, and there was a mighty twitter in the
branches. William never spoke for he stood turned to stone as he stooped; and Bert and Tom were
stuck like rocks as they looked at him. And there they stand to this day, all alone, unless the birds
perch on them; for trolls, as you probably know, must be underground before dawn, or they go back
to the stuff of the mountains they are made of, and never move again. That is what had happened to
Bert and Tom and William. “Excellent!” said Gandalf, as he stepped from behind a tree, and helped
Bilbo to climb down out of a thorn-bush. Then Bilbo understood. It was the wizard’s voice that had
kept the trolls bickering and quarrelling, until the light came and made an end of them.
The next thing was to untie the sacks and let out the dwarves. They were nearly suffocated,
and very annoyed: they had not at all enjoyed lying there listening to the trolls making plans for
roasting them and squashing them and mincing them. They had to hear Bilbo’s account of what had
happened to him twice over, before they were satisfied.
“Silly time to go practising pinching and pocket-picking,” said Bombur, “when what we
wanted was fire and food!”
“And that’s just what you wouldn’t have got of those fellows without a struggle, in any case,”
said Gandalf.
“Anyhow you are wasting time now. Don’t you realize that the trolls must have a cave or a
hole dug somewhere near to hide from the sun in? We must look into it!”
They searched about, and soon found the marks of trolls’ stony boots going away through the
trees. They followed the tracks up the hill, until hidden by bushes they came on a big door of stone
leading to a cave. But they could not open it, not though they all pushed while Gandalf tried various
incantations.
“Would this be any good?” asked Bilbo, when they were getting tired and angry. “I found it
on the ground where the trolls had their fight.” He held out a largish key, though no doubt William
had thought it very small and secret. It must have fallen out of his pocket, very luckily, before he
was turned to stone.
“Why on earth didn’t you mention it before?” they cried. Gandalf grabbed it and fitted it into
the key-hole. Then the stone door swung back with one big push, and they all went inside. There
were bones on the floor and a nasty smell was in the air; but there was a good deal of food jumbled
carelessly on shelves and on the ground, among an untidy litter of plunder, of all sorts from brass
buttons to pots full of gold coins standing in a corner. There were lots of clothes, too, hanging on
the walls-too small for trolls, I am afraid they belonged to victims-and among them were several
swords of various makes, shapes, and sizes. Two caught their eyes particularly, because of their
beautiful scabbards and jewelled hilts. Gandalf and Thorin each took one of these; and Bilbo took a
knife in a leather sheath. It would have made only a tiny pocket-knife for a troll, but it was as good
as a short sword for the hobbit.
“These look like good blades,” said the wizard, half drawing them and looking at them
curiously. “They were not made by any troll, nor by any smith among men in these parts and days;
but when we can read the runes on them, we shall know more about them.”
“Let’s get out of this horrible smell!” said Fili So they carried out the pots of coins, and such
food as was un-touched and looked fit to eat, also one barrel of ale which was still full. By that time
they felt like breakfast, and being very hungry they did not turn their noses up at what they had got
from the trolls’ larder. Their own provisions were very scanty. Now they had bread and cheese, and
plenty of ale, and bacon to toast in the embers of the fire. After that they slept, for their night had
been disturbed; (and they did nothing more till the afternoon. Then they I brought up their ponies,
and carried away the pots of gold, and buried them very secretly not far from the track by the river,
putting a great many spells over them, just in case they ever had the-chance to come back and
recover them. When that was done, they all mounted once more, and jogged along again on the path
towards the East. “Where did you go to, if I may ask?” said Thorin to Gandalf as they rode along.“To look ahead,” said he.
“And what brought you back in the nick of time?”
“Looking behind,” said he.
“Exactly!” said Thorin; “but could you be more plain?” “I went on to spy out our road. It will
soon become dangerous and difficult. Also I was anxious about replenishing our small stock of
provisions. I had not gone very far, however, when I met a couple of friends of mine from
Rivendell.”
“Where’s that?” asked Bilbo,
“Don’t interrupt!” said Gandalf. “You will get there in a few days now, if we’re lucky, and
find out all about it As I was saying I met two of Elrond’s people. They were hurrying along for fear
of the trolls. It was they who told me that three of them had come down from the mountains and
settled in the woods not far from the road; they had frightened everyone away from the district, and
they waylaid strangers.
“I immediately had a feeling that I was wanted back. Looking behind I saw a fire in the
distance and made for it. So now you know. Please be more careful, next time, or we shall never get
anywhere!”
“Thank you!” said Thorin.
Chapter  
A Short Rest
They did not sing or tell stories that day, even though the weather improved; nor the next day,
nor the day after. They had begun to feel that danger was not far away on either side. They camped
under the stars, and their horses had more to eat than they had; for there was plenty of grass, but
there was not much in their bags, even with what they had got from the trolls. One morning they
forded a river at a wide shallow place full of the noise of stones and foam. The far bank was steep
and slippery. When they got to the top of it, leading their ponies, they saw that the great mountains
had marched down very near to them. Already they I seemed only a day’s easy journey from the
feet of the nearest. Dark and drear it looked, though there were patches of sunlight on its brown
sides, and behind its shoulders the tips of snow-peaks gleamed.
“Is that The Mountain?” asked Bilbo in a solemn voice, looking at it with round eyes. He had
never seen a thing that looked so big before. “Of course not!” said Balin. “That is only the
beginning of the Misty Mountains, and we have to get through, or over, or under those somehow,
before we can come into Wilderland beyond. And it is a deal of a way even from the other side of
them to the Lonely Mountain in the East Where Smaug lies on our treasure.”
“O!” said Bilbo, and just at that moment he felt more fared than he ever remembered feeling
before. He was thinking once again of his comfortable chair before the fire in his favourite
sitting-room in his hobbit-hole, and of the kettle singing. Not for the last time!
Now Gandalf led the way. “We must not miss the road, or we shall be done for,” he said. “We
need food, for one thing, and rest in reasonable safety-also it is very necessary to tackle the Misty
Mountains by the proper path, or else you will get lost in them, and have to come back and start at
the beginning again (if you ever get back at all).”
They asked him where he was making for, and he answered: “You are come to the very edge
of the Wild, as some of you may know. Hidden somewhere ahead of us is the fair valley of
Rivendell where Elrond lives in the Last Homely House. I sent a message by my friends, and we are
expected.” That sounded nice and comforting, but they had not got there yet, and it was not so easy
as it sounds to find the Last Homely House west of the Mountains. There seemed to be no trees and
no valleys and no hills to break the ground in front of them, only one vast slope going slowly up
and up to meet the feet of the nearest mountain, a wide land the colour of heather and crumbling
rock, with patches and slashes of grass-green and moss-green showing where water might be.
Morning passed, afternoon came; but in all the silent waste there was no sign of any dwelling.
They were growing anxious, for they now saw that the house might be hidden almost anywherebetween them and the mountains. They came on unexpected valleys, narrow with deep sides, that
opened suddenly at their feet, and they looked down surprised to see trees below them and running
water at the bottom. There were gullies that they could almost leap over; but very deep with
waterfalls in them. There were dark ravines that one could neither jump nor climb into. There were
bogs, some of them green pleasant places to look at with flowers growing bright and tall; but a pony
that walked there with a pack on its back would never have come out again. It was indeed a much
wider land from the ford to the mountains than ever you would have guessed. Bilbo was astonished.
The only path was marked with white stones some of which were small, and others were half
covered with moss or heather. Altogether it was a very slow business following the track, even
guided by Gandalf, who seemed to know his way about pretty well. His head and beard wagged this
way and that as he looked for the stones, and they followed his head, but they seemed no nearer to
the end of the search when the day began to fail. Tea-time had long gone by, and it seemed
supper-time would soon do the same. There were moths fluttering about, and the light became very
dim, for the moon had not risen. Bilbo’s pony began to stumble over roots and stones. They came to
the edge of a steep fall in the ground so suddenly that Gandalf s horse nearly slipped down the
slope. “Here it is at last!” he called, and the others gathered round him and looked over the edge.
They saw a valley far below. They could hear the voice of hurrying water in rocky bed at the
bottom; the scent of trees was in the air; and there was a light on the valley-side across the water.
Bilbo never forgot the way they slithered and slipped in the dusk down the steep zig-zag path into
the secret valley of Rivendell. The air grew warmer as they got lower, and the smell of the
pine-trees made him drowsy, so that every now and again he nodded and nearly fell off, or bumped
his nose on the pony’s neck. Their spirits rose as they went down and down. The trees changed to
beech and oak, and hire was a comfortable feeling in the twilight. The last green had almost faded
out of the grass, when they came at length to an open glade not far above the banks of the stream.
“Hrnmm! it smells like elves!” thought Bilbo, and he looked up at the stars. They were
burning bright and blue. Just then there came a burst of song like laughter in the trees:
“O! What are you doing,
And where are you going?
Your ponies need shoeing!
The river is flowing!
O! tra-la-la-lally
here down in the valley!
O! What are you seeking,
And where are you making?
The faggots are reeking,
The bannocks are baking!
O! tril-lil-lil-lolly
the valley is jolly,
ha! ha!
O! Where are you going
With beards all a-wagging?
No knowing, no knowing
What brings Mister Baggins,
And Balin and Dwalin
down into the valley
in June
ha! ha!
O! Will you be staying,
Or will you be flying?
Your ponies are straying!
The daylight is dying!
To fly would be folly,To stay would be jolly
And listen and hark
Till the end of the dark
to our tune
ha! ha.’”
So they laughed and sang in the trees; and pretty fair nonsense I daresay you think it. Not that
they would care they would only laugh all the more if you told them so. They were elves of course.
Soon Bilbo caught glimpses of them as the darkness deepened. He loved elves, though he seldom
met them; but he was a little frightened of them too. Dwarves don’t get on well with them. Even
decent enough dwarves like Thorin and his friends think them foolish (which is a very foolish thing
to think), or get annoyed with them. For some elves tease them and laugh at them, and most of all at
their beards. “Well, well!” said a voice. “Just look! Bilbo the hobbit on a pony, my dear! Isn’t it
delicious!”
“Most astonishing wonderful!”
Then off they went into another song as ridiculous as the one I have written down in full. At
last one, a tall young fellow, came out from the trees and bowed to Gandalf and to Thorin.
“Welcome to the valley!” he said.
“Thank you!” said Thorin a bit gruffly; but Gandalf was already off his horse and among the
elves, talking merrily with them. “You are a little out of your way,” said the elf: “that is, if you are
making for the only path across the water and to the house beyond. We will set you right, but you
had best get on foot, until you are over the bridge. Are you going to stay a bit and sing with us, or
will you go straight on? Supper is preparing over there,” he said. “I can smell the Wood-fires for the
cooking.”
Tired as he was, Bilbo would have liked to stay awhile. Elvish singing is not a thing to miss,
in June under the stars, not if you care for such things.
Also he would have liked to have a few private words with these people that seemed to know
his name and all about him, although he had never been them before. He thought their opinion of
his adventure might be interesting. Elves know a lot and are wondrous folk for news, and know
what is going on among the peoples of the land, as quick as water flows, or quicker. But the
dwarves were all for supper as soon ‘as possible just then, and would not stay. On they all went,
leading their ponies, till they were brought to a good path and so at last to the very brink of the
river. It was flowing fast and noisily, as mountain-streams do of a summer evening, when sun has
been all day on the snow far up above. There was only a narrow bridge of stone without a parapet,
as narrow as a pony could well walk on; and over that they had to go, slow and careful, one by one,
each leading his pony by the bridle. The elves had brought bright lanterns to the shore, and they
sang a merry song as the party went across.
“Don’t dip your beard in the foam, father!” they cried to Thorin, who was bent almost on to
his hands and knees. “It is long enough without watering it.”
“Mind Bilbo doesn’t eat all the cakes!” they called. “He is too fat to get through key-holes
yet!”
“Hush, hush! Good People! and good night!” said Gandalf, who came last.
“Valleys have ears, and some elves have over merry tongues. Good night!” And so at last they
all came to the Last Homely House, and found its doors flung wide.
Now it is a strange thing, but things that are good to have and days that are good to spend are
soon told about, and not much to listen to; while things that are uncomfortable, palpitating, and
even gruesome, may make a good tale, and take a deal of telling anyway. They stayed long in that
good house, fourteen days at least, and they found it hard to leave. Bilbo would gladly have stopped
there for ever and ever-even supposing a wish would have taken him right back to his hobbit-hole
without trouble. Yet there is little to tell about their stay.
The master of the house was an elf-friend-one of those people whose fathers came into the
strange stories before the beginning of History, the wars of the evil goblins and the elves and the
first men in the North. In those days of our tale there were still some people who had both elves andheroes of the North for ancestors, and Elrond the master of the house was their chief. He was as
noble and as fair in face as an elf-lord, as strong as a warrior, as wise as a wizard, as venerable as a
king of dwarves, and as kind as summer. He comes into. many tales, but his part in the story of
Bilbo’s great adventure is only a small one, though important, as you will see, if we ever get to the
end of it. His house was perfect, whether you liked food, or sleep, or work, or story-telling, or
singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant mixture of them all. Evil things did not come
into that valley.
I wish I had time to tell you even a few of the tales or one or two of the songs that they heard
in that house. All of them, the ponies as well, grew refreshed and strong in a few days there. Their
clothes were mended as well as their bruises, their tempers and their hopes. Their bags were filled
with food and provisions light to carry but strong to bring them over the mountain passes. Their
plans were improved with the best advice. So the time came to mid– summer eve, and they were to
go on again with the early sun on midsummer morning.
Elrond knew all about runes of every kind. That day he looked at the swords they had brought
from the trolls’ lair, and he said: “These are not troll-make. They are old swords, very old swords of
the High Elves of the West, my kin. They were made in Gondolin for the Goblin-wars. They must
have come from a dragon’s hoard or goblin plunder, for dragons and goblins destroyed that city
many ages ago. This, Thorin, the runes name Orcrist, the Goblin-cleaver in the ancient tongue of
Gondolin; it was a famous blade. This, Gandalf, was Glamdring, Foe-hammer that the king of
Gondolin once wore. Keep them well!”
“Whence did the trolls get them, I wonder?” said Thorin looking at his sword with new
interest.
“I could not say,” said Elrond, “but one may guess that your trolls had plundered other
plunderers, or come on the remnants of old robberies in some hold in the mountains of the North. I
have heard that there are still forgotten treasures of old to be found in the deserted caverns of the
mines of Moria, since the dwarf and goblin war.”
Thorin pondered these words. “I will keep this sword in honour,” he said.
“May it soon cleave goblins once again!”
“A wish that is likely to be granted soon enough in the mountains!” said Elrond. “But show
me now your map!” He took it and gazed long at it, and he shook his head; for if he did not
altogether approve of dwarves and their love of gold, he hated dragons and their cruel wickedness,
and he grieved to remember the ruin of the town of Dale and its merry bells, and the burned banks
of the bright River Running. The moon was shining in a broad silver crescent. He held up the map
and the white light shone through it. “What is this?” he said. “There are moon-letters here, beside
the plain runes which say ‘five feet high the door and three may walk abreast.’ “ “What are
moon-letters?” asked the hobbit full of excitement. He loved maps, as I have told you before; and
he also liked runes and letters and cunning handwriting, though when he wrote himself it was a bit
thin and spidery.
“Moon-letters are rune-letters, but you cannot see them,” said Elrond, “not when you look
straight at them. They can only be seen when the moon shines behind them, and what is more, with
the more cunning sort it must be a moon of the same shape and season as the day when they were
written. The dwarves invented them and wrote them with silver pens, as your friends could tell you.
These must have been written on a midsummer’s eve in a crescent moon, a long while ago.”
“What do they say?” asked Gandalf and Thorin together, a bit vexed perhaps that even Elrond
should have found this out first, though really there had not been a chance before, and there would
not have been another until goodness knows when.
“Stand by the grey stone when the thrush knocks,” read Elrond, “and the setting sun with the
last light of Durin’s Day will shine upon the key-hole.” “Durin, Durin!” said Thorin. “He was the
father of the fathers of the eldest race of Dwarves, the Longbeards, and my first ancestor: I am his
heir.” “Then what is Durin’s Day?” asked Elrond.
“The first day of the dwarves’ New Year,” said Thorin, “is as all should know the first, day of
the last moon of Autumn on the threshold of Winter. We still call it Durin’s Day when the last moonof Autumn and the sun are in the sky together. But this will not help us much, I fear, for it passes
our skill in these days to guess when such a time will come again.” “That remains to be seen,” said
Gandalf. “Is there any more writing?” “None to be seen by this moon,” said Elrond, and he gave the
map back to Thorin; and then they went down to the water to see the elves dance and sing upon the
midsummer’s eve.
The next morning was a midsummer’s morning as fair and fresh as could be dreamed: blue
sky and never a cloud, and the sun dancing on the water. Now they rode away amid songs of
farewell and good speed, with their hearts ready for more adventure, and with a knowledge of the
road they must follow over the Misty Mountains to the land beyond.
Chapter  
Over Hill and Under Hill
There were many paths that led up into those mountains, and many passes over them. But
most of the paths were cheats and deceptions and led nowhere or to bad ends; and most of the
passes were infested by evil things and dreadful dangers. The dwarves and the hobbit, helped by the
wise advice of Elrond and the knowledge and memory of Gandalf, took the right road to the right
pass.
Long days after they had climbed out of the valley and left the Last Homely House miles
behind, they were still going up and up and up. It was a hard path and a dangerous path, a crooked
way and a lonely and a long. Now they could look back over the lands they had left, laid out behind
them far below. Far, far away in the West, where things were blue and faint, Bilbo knew there lay
his own country of safe and comfortable things, and his little hobbit-hole. He shivered. It was
getting bitter cold up here, and the wind came shrill among the rocks. Boulders, too, at times came
galloping down the mountain-sides, let loose by midday sun upon the snow, and passed among
them (which was lucky), or over their heads (which was alarming). The nights were comfortless and
chill, and they did not dare to sing or talk too loud, for the echoes were uncanny, and the silence
seemed to dislike being broken-except by the noise of water and the wail of wind and the crack of
stone. “The summer is getting on down below,” thought Bilbo, “and haymaking is going on and
picnics. They will be harvesting and blackberrying, before we even begin to go down the other side
at this rate.” And the others were thinking equally gloomy thoughts, although when they had said
good-bye to Elrond in the high hope of a midsummer morning, they’ had spoken gaily of the
passage of the mountains, and of riding swift across the lands beyond. They had thought of coming
to the secret door in the Lonely Mountain, perhaps that very next first moon of Autumn-“ and
perhaps it will be Durin’s Day” they had said. Only Gandalf had shaken his head and said nothing.
Dwarves had not passed that way for many years, but Gandalf had, and he knew how evil and
danger had grown and thriven in the Wild, since the dragons had driven men from the lands, and the
goblins had spread in secret after the battle of the Mines of Moria. Even the good plans of wise
wizards like Gandalf and of good friends like Elrond go astray sometimes when you are off on
dangerous adventures over the Edge of the Wild; and Gandalf was a wise enough wizard to know it.
He knew that something unexpected might happen, and he hardly dared to hope that they
would pass without fearful adventure over those great tall mountains with lonely peaks and valleys
where no king ruled. They did not. All was well, until one day they met a thunderstorm – more than
a thunderstorm, a thunder-battle. You know how terrific a really big thunderstorm can be down in
the land and in a river-valley; especially at times when two great thunderstorms meet and clash.
More terrible still are thunder and lightning in the mountains at night, when storms come up from
East and West and make war. The lightning splinters on the peaks, and rocks shiver, and great
crashes split the air and go rolling and tumbling into every cave and hollow; and the darkness is
filled with overwhelming noise and sudden light. Bilbo had never seen or imagined anything of the
kind. They were high up in a narrow place, with a dreadful fall into a dim valley at one side of
them. There they were sheltering under a hanging rock for the night, and he lay beneath a blanket
and shook from head to toe. When he peeped out in the lightning-flashes, he saw that across thevalley the stone-giants were out and were hurling rocks at one another for a. game, and catching
them, and tossing them down into the darkness where they smashed among the trees far below, or
splintered into little bits with a bang. Then came a wind and a rain, and the wind whipped the rain
and the hail about in every direction, so that an overhanging rock was no protection at all. Soon they
were getting drenched and their ponies were standing with their heads down and their tails between
their legs, and some of them were whinnying with fright. They could hear the giants guffawing and
shouting all over the mountainsides.
“This won’t do at all!” said Thorin. “If we don’t get blown off or drowned, or struck by
lightning, we shall be picked up by some giant and kicked sky-high for a football.”
“Well, if you know of anywhere better, take us there!” said Gandalf, who was feeling very
grumpy, and was far from happy about the giants himself. The end of their argument was that they
sent Fill and Kili to look for a better shelter. They had very sharp eyes, and being the youngest of
the dwarves by some fifty years they usually got these sort of jobs (when everybody could see that
it was absolutely no use sending Bilbo). There is nothing like looking, if you want to find
something (or so Thorin said to the young dwarves). You certainly usually find something, if you
look, but it is not always quite the something you were after. So it proved on this occasion.
Soon Fili and Kili came crawling back, holding on to the rocks in the wind. “We have found a
dry cave,” they said, “not far round the next corner; and ponies and all could get inside.”
“Have you thoroughly explored it?” said the wizard, who knew that caves up in the mountains
were seldom unoccupied.
“Yes, yes!” they said, though everybody knew they could not have been long about it; they
had come back too quick. “It isn’t all that big, and it does not go far back.”
That, of course, is the dangerous part about caves: you don’t know how far they go back,
sometimes, or where a passage behind may lead to, or what is waiting for you inside. But now Fili
and Kill’s news seemed good enough. So they all got up and prepared to move. The wind was
howling and the thunder still growling, and they had a business getting themselves and their ponies
along. Still it was not very far to go, and before long they came to a big rock standing out into the
path. If you stepped behind, you found a low arch in the side of the mountain. There was just room
to get the ponies through with a squeeze, when they had been unpacked and unsaddled. As they
passed under the arch, it was good to hear the wind and the rain outside instead of all about them,
and to feel safe from the giants and their rocks. But the wizard was taking no risks. He lit up his
wand – as he did that day in Bilbo’s dining-room that seemed so long ago, if you remember-, and by
its light they explored the cave from end to end.
It seemed quite a fair size, but not too large and mysterious. It had a dry floor and some
comfortable nooks. At one end there was room for the ponies; and there they stood (mighty glad of
the change) steaming, and champing in their nosebags. Oin and Gloin wanted to light a fire at the
door to dry their clothes, but Gandalf would not hear of it. So they spread out their wet things on the
floor, and got dry ones out of their bundles; then they made their blankets comfortable, got out their
pipes and blew smoke rings, which Gandalf turned into different colours and set dancing up by the
roof to amuse them. They talked and talked, and forgot about the storm, and discussed what each
would do with his share of the treasure (when they got it, which at the moment did not seem so
impossible); and so they dropped off to sleep one by one. And that was the last time that they used
the ponies, packages, baggages, tools and paraphernalia that they had brought with them. It turned
out a good thing that night that they had brought little Bilbo with them, after all. For somehow, he
could not go to sleep for a long while; and when he did sleep, he had very nasty dreams. He
dreamed that a crack in the wall at the back of the cave got bigger and bigger, and opened wider and
wider, and he was very afraid but could not call out or do anything but lie and look. Then he
dreamed that the floor of the cave was giving way, and he was slipping-beginning to fall down,
down, goodness knows where to. At that he woke up with a horrible start, and found that part of his
dream was true. A crack had opened at the back of the cave, and was already a wide passage. He
was just in time to see the last of the ponies’ tails disappearing into it. Of course he gave a very loud
yell, as loud a yell as a hobbit can give, which is surprising for their size.Out jumped the goblins, big goblins, great ugly-looking goblins, lots of goblins, before you
could say rocks and blocks. There were six to each dwarf, at least, and two even for Bilbo; and they
were all grabbed and carried through the crack, before you could say tinder and flint. But not
Gandalf. Bilbo’s yell had done that much good. It had wakened him up wide in a splintered second,
and when goblins came to grab him, there was a terrible flash like lightning in the cave, a smell like
gunpowder, and several of them fell dead.
The crack closed with a snap, and Bilbo and the dwarves were on the wrong side of it! Where
was Gandalf? Of that neither they nor the goblins had any idea, and the goblins did not wait to find
out. It was deep, deep, dark, such as only goblins that have taken to living in the heart of the
mountains can see through. The passages there were crossed and tangled in all directions, but the
goblins knew their way, as well as you do to the nearest post-office and the way went down and
down, and it was most horribly stuffy. The goblins were very rough, and pinched unmercifully, and
chuckled and laughed in their horrible stony voices; and Bilbo was more unhappy even than when
the troll had picked him up by his toes. He wished again and again for his nice bright hobbit-hole.
Not for the last time.
Now there came a glimmer of a red light before them. The goblins began to sing, or croak,
keeping time with the flap of their flat feet on the stone, and shaking their prisoners as well.
“Clap! Snap! the black crack!
Grip, grab! Pinch, nab!
And down down to Goblin-town
You go, my lad!
Clash, crash! Crush, smash!
Hammer and tongs! Knocker and gongs!
Pound, pound, far underground!
Ho, ho! my lad!
Swish, smack! Whip crack!
Batter and beat! Yammer and bleat!
Work, work! Nor dare to shirk,
While Goblins quaff, and Goblins laugh,
Round and round far underground
Below, my lad!”
It sounded truly terrifying. The walls echoed to the clap, snap! and the crush, smash! and to
the ugly laughter of their ho, ho! my lad! The general meaning of the song was only too plain; for
now the goblins took out whips and whipped them with a swish, smack!, and set them running as
fast as they could in front of them; and more than one of the dwarves were already yammering and
bleating like anything, when they stumbled into a big cavern. It was lit by a great red fire in the
middle, and by torches along the walls, and it was full of goblins. They all laughed and stamped and
clapped their hands, when the dwarves (with poor little Bilbo at the back and nearest to the whips)
came running in, while the goblin-drivers whooped and cracked their whips behind. The ponies
were already there huddled in a corner; and there were all the baggages and packages lying broken
open, and being rummaged by goblins, and smelt by goblins, and fingered by goblins, and quarreled
over by goblins.
I am afraid that was the last they ever saw of those excellent little ponies, including a jolly
sturdy little white fellow that Elrond had lent to Gandalf, since his horse was not suitable for the
mountain-paths. For goblins eat horses and ponies and donkeys (and other much more dreadful
things), and they are always hungry. Just now however the prisoners were thinking only of
themselves. The goblins chained their hands behind their backs and linked them all together in a
line and dragged them to the far end of the cavern with little Bilbo tugging at the end of the row.
There in the shadows on a large flat stone sat a tremendous goblin with a huge head, and
armed goblins were standing round him carrying the axes and the bent swords that they use. Now
goblins are cruel, wicked, and bad-hearted.
They make no beautiful things, but they make many clever ones. They can tunnel and mine aswell as any but the most skilled dwarves, when they take the trouble, though they are usually untidy
and dirty. Hammers, axes, swords, daggers, pickaxes, tongs, and also instruments of torture, they
make very well, or get other people to make to their design, prisoners and slaves that have to work
till they die for want of air and light. It is not unlikely that they invented some of the machines that
have since troubled the world, especially the ingenious devices for killing large numbers of people
at once, for wheels and engines and explosions always delighted them, and also not working with
their own hands more than they could help; but in those days and those wild parts they had not
advanced (as it is called) so far. They did not hate dwarves especially, no more than they hated
everybody and everything, and particularly the orderly and prosperous; in some parts wicked
dwarves had even made alliances with them. But they had a special grudge against Thorin’s people,
because of the war which you have heard mentioned, but which does not come into this tale; and
anyway goblins don’t care who they catch, as long as it is done smart and secret, and the prisoners
are not able to defend themselves.
“Who are these miserable persons?” said the Great Goblin. “Dwarves, and this!” said one of
the drivers, pulling at Bilbo’s chain so that he fell forward onto his knees.
“We found them sheltering in our Front Porch.”
“What do you mean by it?” said the Great Goblin turning to Thorin. “Up to no good, I’ll
warrant! Spying on the private business of my people, I guess! Thieves, I shouldn’t be surprised to
learn! Murderers and friends of Elves, not unlikely! Come! What have you got to say?”
“Thorin the dwarf at your service!” he replied-it was merely a polite nothing. “Of the things
which you suspect and imagine we had no idea at all. We sheltered from a storm in what seemed a
convenient cave and unused; nothing was further from our thoughts than inconveniencing goblins in
any way whatever.” That was true enough!
“Urn!” said the Great Goblin. “So you say! Might I ask what you were doing up in the
mountains at all, and where you were coming from, and where you were going to? In fact I should
like to know all about you. Not that it willdo you much good, Thorin Oakenshield, I know too much
about your folk already; but let’s have the truth, or I will prepare something particularly
uncomfortable for you!”
“We were on a journey to visit our relatives, our nephews and nieces, and first, second, and
third cousins, and the other descendants of our grandfathers, who live on the East side of these truly
hospitable mountains,” said Thorin, not quite knowing what to say all at once in a moment, when
obviously the exact truth would not do at all.
“He is a liar, O truly tremendous one!” said one of the drivers. “Several of our people were
struck by lightning in the cave, when we invited these creatures to come below; and they are as
dead as stones. Also he has not explained this!” He held out the sword which Thorin had worn, the
sword which came from the Trolls’ lair.
The Great Goblin gave a truly awful howl of rage when he looked at it, and all his soldiers
gnashed their teeth, clashed their shields, and stamped. They knew the sword at once. It had killed
hundreds of goblins in its time, when the fair elves of Gondolin hunted them in the hills or did battle
before their walls. They had called it Orcrist, Goblin-cleaver, but the goblins called it simply Biter.
They hated it and hated worse any one that carried it. “Murderers’ and elf-friends!” the Great
Goblin shouted. “Slash them! Beat them! Bite them! Gnash them! Take them away to dark holes
full of snakes, and never let them see the light again!” He was in such a rage that he jumped off his
seat and himself rushed at Thorin with his mouth open. Just at that moment all the lights in the
cavern went out, and the great fire went off poof! into a tower of blue glowing smoke, right up to
the roof, that scattered piercing white sparks all among the goblins. The yells and yammering,
croaking, jibbering and jabbering; howls, growls and curses; shrieking and skriking, that followed
were beyond description. Several hundred wild cats and wolves being roasted slowly alive together
would not have compared with it. The sparks were burning holes in the goblins, and the smoke that
now fell from the roof made the air too thick for even their eyes to see through. Soon they were
falling over one another and rolling in heaps on the floor, biting and kicking and fighting as if they
had all gone mad.Suddenly a sword flashed in its own light. Bilbo saw it go right through the Great Goblin as
he stood dumbfounded in the middle of his rage. He fell dead, and the goblin soldiers fled before
the sword shrieking into the darkness.
The sword went back into its sheath. “Follow me quick!” said a voice fierce and quiet; and
before Bilbo understood what had happened he was trotting along again, as fast as he could trot, at
the end of the line, down more dark passages with the yells of the goblin-hall growing fainter
behind him. A pale light was leading them on.
“Quicker, quicker!” said the voice. “The torches will soon be relit.” “Half a minute!” said
Dori, who was at the back next to Bilbo, and a decent fellow. He made the hobbit scramble on his
shoulders as best he could with his tied hands, and then off they all went at a run, with a clink-clink
of chains, and many a stumble, since they had no hands to steady themselves with. Not for a long
while did they stop, and by that time they must have been right down in the very mountain’s heart.
Then Gandalf lit up his wand. Of course it was Gandalf; but just then they were too busy to
ask how he got there. He took out his sword again, and again it flashed in the dark by itself. It
burned with a rage that made it gleam if goblins were about; now it was bright as blue flame for
delight in the killing of the great lord of the cave. It made no trouble whatever of cutting through the
goblin-chains and setting all the prisoners free as quickly as possible. This sword’s name was
Glamdring the Foe-hammer, if you remember. The goblins just called it Beater, and hated it worse
than Biter if possible. Orcrist, too, had been saved; for Gandalf had brought it along as well,
snatching it from one of the terrified guards. Gandalf thought of most things; and though he could
not do everything, he could do a great deal for friends in a tight comer.
“Are we all here?” said he, handing his sword back to Thorin with a bow. “Let me see:
one-that’s Thorin; two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven; where are Fili and Kili?
Here they are, twelve, thirteen-and here’s Mr. Baggins: fourteen! Well, well! it might be worse, and
then again it might be a good deal better. No ponies, and no food, and no knowing quite where we
are, and hordes of angry goblins just behind! On we go!” On they went. Gandalf was quite right:
they began to hear goblin noises and horrible cries far behind in the passages they had come
through. That sent them on faster than ever, and as poor Bilbo could not possibly go half as fast-for
dwarves can roll along at a tremendous pace, I can tell you, when they have to-they took it in turn to
carry him on their backs. Still goblins go faster than dwarves, and these goblins knew the way better
(they had made the paths themselves), and were madly angry; so that do what they could the
dwarves heard the cries and howls getting closer and closer. Soon they could hear even the flap of
the goblin feet, many many feet which seemed only just round the last corner. The blink of red
torches could be seen behind them in the tunnel they were following; and they were getting deadly
tired.
“Why, O why did I ever leave my hobbit-hole!” said poor Mr. Baggins bumping up and down
on Bombur’s back.
“Why, O why did I ever bring a wretched little hobbit on a treasure hunt!” said poor Bombur,
who was fat, and staggered along with the sweat dripping down his nose in his heat and terror.
At this point Gandalf fell behind, and Thorin with him. They turned a sharp corner. “About
turn!” he shouted. “Draw your sword, Thorin!” There was nothing else to be done; and the goblins
did not like it. They came scurrying round the corner in full cry, and found Goblin-cleaver and
Foe-hammer shining cold and bright right in their astonished eyes. The ones in front dropped their
torches and gave one yell before they were killed. The ones behind yelled still more, and leaped
back knocking over those that were running after them. “Biter and Beater!” they shrieked; and soon
they were all in confusion, and most of them were hustling back the way they had come.
It was quite a long while before any of them dared to turn that comer. By that time the
dwarves had gone on again, a long, long, way on into the dark tunnels of the goblins’ realm. When
the goblins discovered that, they put out their torches and they slipped on soft shoes, and they chose
out their very quickest runners with the sharpest ears and eyes. These ran forward, as swift as
weasels in the dark, and with hardly any more noise than bats. That is why neither Bilbo, nor the
dwarves, nor even Gandalf heard them coming. Nor did they see them. But they were seen by thegoblins that ran silently up behind, for Gandalf was letting his wand give out a faint light to help the
dwarves as they went along.
Quite suddenly Dori, now at the back again carrying Bilbo, was grabbed from behind in the
dark. He shouted and fell; and the hobbit rolled off his shoulders into the blackness, bumped his
head on hard rock, and remembered nothing more.
Chapter  
Riddles in the Dark
When Bilbo opened his eyes, he wondered if he had; for it was just as dark as with them shut.
No one was anywhere near him. Just imagine his fright! He could hear nothing, see nothing, and he
could feel nothing except the stone of the floor.
Very slowly he got up and groped about on all fours, till he touched the wall of the tunnel; but
neither up nor down it could he find anything: nothing at all, no sign of goblins, no sign of dwarves.
His head was swimming, and he was far from certain even of the direction they had been going in
when he had his fall. He guessed as well as he could, and crawled along for a good way, till
suddenly his hand met what felt like a tiny ring of cold metal lying on the floor of the tunnel. It was
a turning point in his career, but he did not know it. He put the ring in his pocket almost without
thinking; certainly it did not seem of any particular use at the moment. He did not go much further,
but sat down on the cold floor and gave himself up to complete miserableness, for a long while. He
thought of himself frying bacon and eggs in his own kitchen at home – for he could feel inside that
it was high time for some meal or other; but that only made him miserabler.
He could not think what to do; nor could he think what had happened; or why he had been left
behind; or why, if he had been left behind, the goblins had not caught him; or even why his head
was so sore. The truth was he had been lying quiet, out of sight and out of mind, in a very dark
corner for a long while.
After some time he felt for his pipe. It was not broken, and that was something. Then he felt
for his pouch, and there was some tobacco in it, and that was something more. Then he felt for
matches and he could not find any at all, and that shattered his hopes completely. Just as well for
him, as he agreed when he came to his senses. Goodness knows what the striking of matches and
the smell of tobacco would have brought on him out of dark holes in that horrible place. Still at the
moment he felt very crushed. But in slapping all his pockets and feeling all round himself for
matches his hand came on the hilt of his little sword – the little dagger that he got from the trolls,
and that he had quite forgotten; nor do the goblins seem to have noticed it, as he wore it inside his
breeches.
Now he drew it out. It shone pale and dim before his eyes. “So it is an elvish blade, too,” he
thought; “and goblins are not very near, and yet not far enough.”
But somehow he was comforted. It was rather splendid to be wearing a blade made in
Gondolin for the goblin-wars of which so many songs had sung; and also he had noticed that such
weapons made a great impression on goblins that came upon them suddenly.
“Go back?” he thought. “No good at all! Go sideways? Impossible! Go forward? Only thing
to do! On we go!” So up he got, and trotted along with his little sword held in front of him and one
hand feeling the wall, and his heart all of a patter and a pitter.
Now certainly Bilbo was in what is called a tight place. But you must remember it was not
quite so tight for him as it would have been for me or for you. Hobbits are not quite like ordinary
people; and after all if their holes are nice cheery places and properly aired, quite different from the
tunnels of the goblins, still they are more used to tunnelling than we are, and they do not easily lose
their sense of direction underground-not when their heads have recovered from being bumped. Also
they can move very quietly, and hide easily, and recover wonderfully from falls and bruises, and
they have a fund of wisdom and wise sayings that men have mostly never heard or have forgotten
long ago. I should not have liked to have been in Mr. Baggins’ place, all the same. The tunnel
seemed to have no end. All he knew was that it was still going down pretty steadily and keeping inthe same direction in spite of a twist and a turn or two. There were passages leading off to the side
every now and then, as he knew by the glimmer of his sword, or could feel with his hand on the
wall. Of these he took no notice, except to hurry past for fear of goblins or half-imagined dark
things coming out of them. On and on he went, and down and down; and still he heard no sound of
anything except the occasional whirr of a bat by his ears, which startled him at first, till it became
too frequent to bother about. I do not know how long he kept on like this, hating to go on, not
daring to stop, on, on, until he was tireder than tired. It seemed like all the way to tomorrow and
over it to the days beyond. Suddenly without any warning he trotted splash into water! Ugh! it was
icy cold. That pulled him up sharp and short. He did not know whether it was just a pool in the path,
or the edge of an underground stream that crossed the passage, or the brink of a deep dark
subterranean lake. The sword was hardly shining at all. He stopped, and he could hear, when he
listened hard, drops drip-drip-dripping from an unseen roof into the water below; but there seemed
no other sort of sound.
“So it is a pool or a lake, and not an underground river,” he thought. Still he did not dare to
wade out into the darkness. He could not swim; and he thought, too, of nasty slimy things, with big
bulging blind eyes, wriggling in the water. There are strange things living in the pools and lakes in
the hearts of mountains: fish whose fathers swam in, goodness only knows how many years ago,
and never swam out again, while their eyes grew bigger and bigger and bigger from trying to see in
the blackness; also there are other things more slimy than fish. Even in the tunnels and caves the
goblins have made for themselves there are other things living unbeknown to them that have
sneaked in from outside to lie up in the dark. Some of these caves, too, go back in their beginnings
to ages before the goblins, who only widened them and joined them up with passages, and the
original owners are still there in odd comers, slinking and nosing about.
Deep down here by the dark water lived old Gollum, a small slimy creature. I don’t know
where he came from, nor who or what he was. He was Gollum – as dark as darkness, except for two
big round pale eyes in his thin face. He had a little boat, and he rowed about quite quietly on the
lake; for lake it was, wide and deep and deadly cold. He paddled it with large feet dangling over the
side, but never a ripple did he make. Not he. He was looking out of his pale lamp-like eyes for blind
fish, which he grabbed with his long fingers as quick as thinking. He liked meat too. Goblin he
thought good, when he could get it; but he took care they never found him out. He just throttled
them from behind, if they ever came down alone anywhere near the edge of the water, while he was
prowling about. They very seldom did, for they had a feeling that something unpleasant was lurking
down there, down at the very roots of the mountain. They had come on the lake, when they were
tunnelling down long ago, and they found they could go no further; so there their road ended in that
direction, and there was no reason to go that way-unless the Great Goblin sent them. Sometimes he
took a fancy for fish from the lake, and sometimes neither goblin nor fish came back.
Actually Gollum lived on a slimy island of rock in the middle of the lake. He was watching
Bilbo now from the distance with his pale eyes like telescopes. Bilbo could not see him, but he was
wondering a lot about Bilbo, for he could see that he was no goblin at all.
Gollum got into his boat and shot off from the island, while Bilbo was sitting on the brink
altogether flummoxed and at the end of his way and his wits. Suddenly up came Gollum and
whispered and hissed:
“Bless us and splash us, my precioussss! I guess it’s a choice feast; at least a tasty morsel it’d
make us, gollum!” And when he said gollum he made a horrible swallowing noise in his throat.
That is how he got his name, though he always called himself ‘my precious.’
The hobbit jumped nearly out of his skin when the hiss came in his ears, and he suddenly saw
the pale eyes sticking out at him. “Who are you?” he said, thrusting his dagger in front of him.
“What iss he, my preciouss?” whispered Gollum (who always spoke to himself through never
having anyone else to speak to). This is what he had come to find out, for he was not really very
hungry at the moment, only curious; otherwise he would have grabbed first and whispered
afterwards. “I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins. I have lost the dwarves and I have lost the wizard, and I don’t
know where I am; and “I don’t want to know, if only I can get,away.”“What’s he got in his handses?” said Gollum, looking at the sword, which he did not quite
like.
“A sword, a blade which came out of Gondolin!”
“Sssss,” said Gollum, and became quite polite. “Praps ye sits here and chats with it a bitsy, my
preciousss. It like riddles, praps it does, does it?” He was anxious to appear friendly, at any rate for
the moment, and until he found out more about the sword and the hobbit, whether he was quite
alone really, whether he was good to eat, and whether Gollum was really hungry. Riddles were all
he could think of. Asking them, and sometimes guessing them, had been the only game he had ever
played with other funny creatures sitting in their holes in the long, long ago, before he lost all his
friends and was driven away, alone, and crept down, down, into the dark under the mountains.
“Very well,” said Bilbo, who was anxious to agree, until he found out more about the creature,
whether he was quite alone, whether he was fierce or hungry, and whether he was a friend of the
goblins.
“You ask first,” he said, because he had not had time to think of a riddle.
So Gollum hissed:
“What has roots as nobody sees,
Is taller than trees,
Up, up it goes,
And yet never grows?”
“Easy!” said Bilbo. “Mountain, I suppose.”
“Does it guess easy? It must have a competition with us, my preciouss! If precious asks, and it
doesn’t answer, we eats it, my preciousss. If it asks us, and we doesn’t answer, then we does what it
wants, eh? We shows it the way out, yes!”
“All right!” said Bilbo, not daring to disagree, and nearly bursting his brain to think of riddles
that could save him from being eaten.
“Thirty white horses on a red hill,
First they champ,
Then they stamp,
Then they stand still.”
That was all he could think of to ask-the idea of eating was rather on
his mind. It was rather an old one, too, and Gollum knew the answer as well as you do.
“Chestnuts, chestnuts,” he hissed. “Teeth! teeth! my preciousss; but we has only six!” Then he
asked his second:
“Voiceless it cries,
Wingless flutters,
Toothless bites,
Mouthless mutters.”
“Half a moment!” cried Bilbo, who was still thinking uncomfortably about eating. Fortunately
he had once heard something rather like this before, and getting his wits back he thought of the
answer. “Wind, wind of course,” he said, and he was so pleased that he made up one on the spot.
“This’ll puzzle the nasty little underground creature,” he thought:
“An eye in a blue face
Saw an eye in a green face.
“That eye is like to this eye”
Said the first eye,
“But in low place,
Not in high place.””
“Ss, ss, ss,” said Gollum. He had been underground a long long time, and was forgetting this
sort of thing. But just as Bilbo was beginning to hope that the wretch would not be able to answer,
Gollum brought up memories of ages and ages and ages before, when he lived with his grandmother
in a hole in a bank by a river, “Sss, sss, my preciouss,” he said. “Sun on the daisies it means, it
does.”But these ordinary aboveground everyday sort of riddles were tiring for him. Also they
reminded him of days when he had been less lonely and sneaky and nasty, and that put him out of
temper. What is more they made him hungry; so this time he tried something a bit more difficult and
more unpleasant:
“It cannot be seen, cannot be felt,
Cannot be heard, cannot be smelt.
It lies behind stars and under hills,
And empty holes it fills.
It comes first and follows after,
Ends life, kills laughter.”
Unfortunately for Gollum Bilbo had heard that sort of thing before; and the answer was all
round him anyway. “Dark!” he said without even scratching his head or putting on his thinking cap.
“A box without hinges, key, or lid,
Yet golden treasure inside is hid,”
he asked to gain time, until he could think of a really hard one. This he thought a dreadfully
easy chestnut, though he had not asked it in the usual words. But it proved a nasty poser for Gollum.
He hissed to himself, and still he did not answer; he whispered and spluttered.
After some while Bilbo became impatient. “Well, what is it?” he said. “The answer’s not a
kettle boiling over, as you seem to think from the noise you are making.”
“Give us a chance; let it give us a chance, my preciouss-ss-ss.” “Well,” said Bilbo, after
giving him a long chance, “what about your guess?”
But suddenly Gollum remembered thieving from nests long ago, and sitting under the river
bank teaching his grandmother, teaching his grandmother to suck-“Eggses!” he hissed. “Eggses it
is!” Then he asked:
“A live without breath,
As cold as death;
Never thirsty, ever drinking,
All in mail never clinking.”
He also in his turn thought this was a dreadfully easy one, because he was always thinking of
the answer. But he could not remember anything better at the moment, he was so flustered by the
egg-question. All the same it was a poser for poor Bilbo, who never had anything to do with the
water if he could help it. I imagine you know the answer, of course, or can guess it as easy as
winking, since you are sitting comfortably at home and have not the danger of being eaten to disturb
your thinking. Bilbo sat and cleared his throat once or twice, but no answer came.
After a while Gollum began to hiss with pleasure to himself: “Is it nice, my preciousss? Is it
juicy? Is it scrumptiously crunchable?” He began to peer at Bilbo out of the darkness.
“Half a moment,” said the hobbit shivering. “I gave you a good long chance just now.”
“It must make haste, haste!” said Gollum, beginning to climb out of his boat on to the shore to
get at Bilbo. But when he put his long webby foot in the water, a fish jumped out in a fright and fell
on Bilbo’s toes. “Ugh!” he said, “it is cold and clammy!”-and so he guessed. “Fish! Fish!” he cried.
“It is fish!”
Gollum was dreadfully disappointed; but Bilbo asked another riddle as quick as ever be could,
so that Gollum had to get back into his boat and think.
“No-legs lay on one-leg, two-legs sat near on three-legs, four-legs got some.”
It was not really the right time for this riddle, but Bilbo was in a hurry. Gollum might have
had some trouble guessing it, if he had asked it at another time. As it was, talking of fish, “no -legs”
was not so very difficult, and after that the rest was easy. “Fish on a little table, man at table sitting
on a stool, the cat has the bones”-that of course is the answer, and Gollum soon gave it. Then he
thought the time had come to ask something hard and horrible. This is what he said:
“This thing all things devours:
Birds, beasts, trees, flowers;
Gnaws iron, bites steel;Grinds hard stones to meal;
Slays king, ruins town,
And beats high mountain down.”
Poor Bilbo sat in the dark thinking of all the horrible names of all the giants and ogres he had
ever heard told of in tales, but not one of them had done all these things. He had a feeling that the
answer was quite different and that he ought to know it, but he could not think of it. He began to get
frightened, and that is bad for thinking. Gollum began to get out of his boat. He flapped into the
water and paddled to the bank; Bilbo could see his eyes coming towards him. His tongue seemed to
stick in his mouth; he wanted to shout out: “Give me more time! Give me time!” But all that came
out with a sudden squeal was:
“Time! Time!”
Bilbo was saved by pure luck. For that of course was the answer.
Gollum was disappointed once more; and now he was getting angry, and also
tired of the game. It had made him very hungry indeed. This time he did not go back to the
boat. He sat down in the dark by Bilbo. That made the hobbit most dreadfully uncomfortable and
scattered his wits.
“It’s got to ask uss a quesstion, my preciouss, yes, yess, yesss. Jusst one more quesstion to
guess, yes, yess,” said Gollum. But Bilbo simply could not think of any question with that nasty wet
cold thing sitting next to him, and pawing and poking him. He scratched himself, he pinched
himself; still he could not think of anything.
“Ask us! ask us!” said Gollum.
Bilbo pinched himself and slapped himself; he gripped on his little sword; he even felt in his
pocket with his other hand. There he found the ring he had picked up in the passage and forgotten
about. “What have I got in my pocket?” he said aloud. He was talking to himself, but Gollum
thought it was a riddle, and he was frightfully upset. “Not fair! not fair!” he hissed. “It isn’t fair, my
precious, is it, to ask us what it’s got in its nassty little pocketses?”
Bilbo seeing what had happened and having nothing better to ask stuck to his question. “What
have I got in my pocket?” he said louder. “S-s-s-s-s,” hissed Gollum. “It must give us three
guesseses, my preciouss, three guesseses.”
“Very well! Guess away!” said Bilbo.
“Handses!” said Gollum.
“Wrong,” said Bilbo, who had luckily just taken his hand out again. “Guess again!”
“S-s-s-s-s,” said Gollum more upset than ever. He thought of all the things he kept in his own
pockets: fishbones, goblins’ teeth, wet shells, a bit of bat-wing, a sharp stone to sharpen his fangs
on, and other nasty things. He tried to think what other people kept in their pockets. “Knife!” he
said at last.
“Wrong!” said Bilbo, who had lost his some time ago. “Last guess!” Now Gollum was in a
much worse state than when Bilbo had asked him the egg-question. He hissed and spluttered and
rocked himself backwards and forwards, and slapped his feet on the floor, and wriggled and
squirmed; but still he did not dare to waste his last guess.
“Come on!” said Bilbo. “I am waiting!” He tried to sound bold and cheerful, but he did not
feel at all sure how the game was going to end, whether Gollum guessed right or not.
“Time’s up!” he said.
“String, or nothing!” shrieked Gollum, which was not quite fair-working in two guesses at
once.
“Both wrong,” cried Bilbo very much relieved; and he jumped at once to his feet, put his back
to the nearest wall, and held out his little sword. He knew, of course, that the riddle-game was
sacred and of immense antiquity, and even wicked creatures were afraid to cheat when they played
at it. But he felt he could not trust this slimy thing to keep any promise at a pinch. Any excuse
would do for him to slide out of it. And after all that last question had not been a genuine riddle
according to the ancient laws.
But at any rate Gollum did not at once attack him. He could see the sword in Bilbo’s hand. Hesat still, shivering and whispering. At last Bilbo could wait no longer.
“Well?” he said. “What about your promise? I want to go. You must show me the way.”
“Did we say so, precious? Show the nassty little Baggins the way out, yes, yes. But what has
it got in its pocketses, eh? Not string, precious, but not nothing. Oh no! gollum!”
“Never you mind,” said Bilbo. “A promise is a promise.” “Cross it is, impatient, precious,”
hissed Gollum. “But it must wait, yes it must. We can’t go up the tunnels so hasty. We must go and
get some things first, yes, things to help us.”
“Well, hurry up!” said Bilbo, relieved to think of Gollum going away. He
thought he was just making an excuse and did not mean to come back. What was Gollum
talking about? What useful thing could he keep out on the dark lake?
But he was wrong. Gollum did mean to come back. He was angry now and hungry.
And he was a miserable wicked creature, and already he had a plan. Not far away was his
island, of which Bilbo knew nothing, and there in his hiding-place he kept a few wretched
oddments, and one very beautiful thing, very beautiful, very wonderful. He had a ring, a golden
ring, a precious ring.
“My birthday-present!” he whispered to himself, as he had often done in the endless dark
days. “That’s what we wants now, yes; we wants it!” He wanted it because it was a ring of power,
and if you slipped that ring on your finger, you were invisible; only in the full sunlight could you be
seen, and then only by your shadow, and that would be shaky and faint. “My birthday-present! It
came to me on my birthday, my precious,” So he had always said to himself. But who knows how
Gollum came by that present, ages ago in the old days when such rings were still at large in the
world? Perhaps even the Master who ruled them could not have said. Gollum used to wear it at first,
till it tired him; and then he kept it in a pouch next his skin, till it galled him; and now usually he hid
it in a hole in the rock on his island, and was always going back to look at it. And still sometimes he
put it on, when he could not bear to be parted from it any longer, or when he was very, very, hungry,
and tired of fish. Then he would creep along dark passages looking for stray goblins. He might even
venture into places where the torches were lit and made his eyes blink and smart; for he would be
safe. Oh yes, quite safe. No one would see him, no one would notice him, till he had his fingers on
their throat. Only a few hours ago he had worn it, and caught a small goblin-imp. How it squeaked!
He still had a bone or two left to gnaw, but he wanted something softer.
“Quite safe, yes,” he whispered to himself. “It won’t see us, will it, my precious? No. It won’t
see us, and its nassty little sword will be useless, yes quite.”
That is what was in his wicked little mind, as he slipped suddenly from Bilbo’s side, and
flapped back to his boat, and went off into the dark. Bilbo thought he had heard the last of him. Still
he waited a while; for he had no idea how to find his way out alone.
Suddenly he heard a screech. It sent a shiver down his back. Gollum was cursing and wailing
away in the gloom, not very far off by the sound of it. He was on his island, scrabbling here and
there, searching and seeking in vain. “Where is it? Where iss it?” Bilbo heard him crying. “Losst it
is, my precious, lost, lost! Curse us and crush us, my precious is lost!” “What’s the matter?” Bilbo
called. “What have you lost?” “It mustn’t ask us,” shrieked Gollum. “Not its business, no, gollum!
It’s losst, gollum, gollum, gollum.”
“Well, so am I,” cried Bilbo, “and I want to get unlost. And I won the game, and you
promised. So come along! Come and let me out, and then go on with your looking!”
Utterly miserable as Gollum sounded, Bilbo could not find much pity in his heart, and he had
a feeling that anything Gollum wanted so much could hardly be something good.
“Come along!” he shouted.
“No, not yet, precious!” Gollum answered. “We must search for it, it’s lost, gollum.”
“But you never guessed my last question, and you promised,” said Bilbo. “Never guessed!”
said Gollum. Then suddenly out of the gloom came a sharp hiss. “What has it got in its pocketses?
Tell us that. It must tell first.” As far as Bilbo knew, there was no particular reason why he should
not tell. Gollum’s mind had jumped to a guess quicker than his; naturally, for Gollum had brooded
for ages on this one thing, and he was always afraid of its being stolen. But Bilbo was annoyed atthe delay. After all, he had won the game, pretty fairly, at a horrible risk. “Answers were to be
guessed not given,” he said.
“But it wasn’t a fair question,” said Gollum. “Not a riddle, precious, no.”
“Oh well, if it’s a matter of ordinary questions,” Bilbo replied, “then I asked one first. What
have you lost? Tell me that!”
“What has it got in its pocketses?” The sound came hissing louder and sharper, and as he
looked towards it, to his alarm Bilbo now saw two small points of light peering at him. As suspicion
grew in Gollum’s mind, the light of his eyes burned with a pale flame.
“What have you lost?” Bilbo persisted. But now the light in Gollum’s eyes had become a
green fire, and it was coming swiftly nearer. Gollum was in his boat again, paddling wildly back to
the dark shore; and such a rage of loss and suspicion was in his heart that no sword had any more
terror for him. Bilbo could not guess what had maddened the wretched creature, but he saw that all
was up, and that Gollum meant to murder him at any rate. Just in time he turned and ran blindly
back up the dark passage down which he had come, keeping close to the wall and feeling it with his
left hand. “What has it got in its pocketses?” he heard the hiss loud behind him, and the splash as
Gollum leapt from his boat.
“What have I, I wonder?” he said to himself, as he panted and stumbled along. He put his left
hand in his pocket. The ring felt very cold as it quietly slipped on to his groping forefinger.
The hiss was close behind him. He turned now and saw Gollum’s eyes like small green lamps
coming up the slope. Terrified he tried to run faster, but suddenly he struck his toes on a snag in the
floor, and fell flat with his little sword under him.
In a moment Gollum was on him. But before Bilbo could do anything, recover his breath, pick
himself up, or wave his sword, Gollum passed by, taking no notice of him, cursing and whispering
as he ran. What could it mean? Gollum could see in the dark. Bilbo could see the light of his eyes
palely shining even from behind. Painfully he got up, and sheathed his sword, which was now
glowing faintly again, then very cautiously he followed. There seemed nothing else to do. It was no
good crawling back down to Gollum’s water. Perhaps if he followed him, Gollum might lead him to
some way of escape without meaning to.
“Curse it! curse it! curse it!” hissed Gollum. “Curse the Baggins! It’s gone! What has it got in
its pocketses? Oh we guess, we guess, my precious. He’s found it, yes he must have. My
birthday-present.” Bilbo pricked up his ears. He was at last beginning to guess himself. H^ hurried a
little, getting as close as he dared behind Gollum, who was still going quickly, not looking back, but
turning his head from side to side, as Bilbo could see from the faint glimmer on the walls.
“My birthday-present! Curse it! How did we lose it, my precious? Yes, that’s it. When we
came this way last, when we twisted that nassty young squeaker. That’s it. Curse it! It slipped from
us, after all these ages and ages! It’s gone, gollum.”
Suddenly Gollum sat down and began to weep, a whistling and gurgling sound horrible to
listen to. Bilbo halted and flattened himself against the tunnel-wall. After a while Gollum stopped
weeping and began to talk. He seemed to be having an argument with himself.
“It’s no good going back there to search, no. We doesn’t remember all the places we’ve
visited. And it’s no use. The Baggins has got it in its pocketses; the nassty noser has found it, we
says.”
“We guesses, precious, only guesses. We can’t know till we find the nassty creature and
squeezes it. But it doesn’t know what the present can do, does it? It’ll just keep it in its pocketses. It
doesn’t know, and it can’t go far. It’s lost itself, the nassty nosey thing. It doesn’t know the way out
It said so.”
“It said so, yes; but it’s tricksy. It doesn’t say what it means. It won’t say what it’s got in its
pocketses. It knows. It knows a way in, it must know a way out, yes. It’s off to the back-door. To the
back-door, that’s it.”
“The goblinses will catch it then. It can’t get out that way, precious.” “Ssss, sss, gollum!
Goblinses! Yes, but if it’s got the present, our precious present, then goblinses will get it, gollum!
They’ll find it, they’ll find out what it does. We shan’t ever be safe again, never, gollum! One of thegoblinses will put it on, and then no one will see him. He’ll be there but not seen. Not even our
clever eyeses will notice him; and he’ll come creepsy and tricksy and catch us, gollum, gollum!”
“Then let’s stop talking, precious, and make haste. If the Baggins has gone that way, we must
go quick and see. Go! Not far now. Make haste!” With a spring Gollum got up and started
shambling off at a great pace. Bilbo hurried after him, still cautiously, though his chief fear now was
of tripping on another snag and falling with a noise. His head was in a whirl of hope and wonder. It
seemed that the ring he had was a magic ring: it made you invisible! He had heard of such things, of
course, in old old tales; but it was hard to believe that he really had found one, by accident. Still
there it was: Gollum with his bright eyes had passed him by, only a yard to one side. On they went,
Gollum flip-flapping ahead, hissing and cursing; Bilbo behind going as softly as a hobbit can. Soon
they came to places where, as Bilbo had noticed on the way down, side-passages opened, this way
and that. Gollum began at once to count them.
“One left, yes. One right, yes. Two right, yes, yes. Two left, yes, yes.” And so on and on.
As the count grew he slowed down, and he began to get shaky and weepy; for he was leaving
the water further and further behind, and he was getting afraid. Goblins might be about, and he had
lost his ring. At last he stopped by a low opening, on their left as they went up.
“Seven right, yes. Six left, yes!” he whispered. “This is it. This is the way to the back-door,
yes. Here’s the passage!”
He peered in, and shrank back. “But we durstn’t go in, precious, no we durstn’t. Goblinses
down there. Lots of goblinses. We smells them. Ssss!” “What shall we do? Curse them and crush
them! We must wait here, precious, wait a bit and see.”
So they came to a dead stop. Gollum had brought Bilbo to the way out after all, but Bilbo
could not get in! There was Gollum sitting humped up right in the opening, and his eyes gleamed
cold in his head, as he swayed it from side to side between his knees.
Bilbo crept away from the wall more quietly than a mouse; but Gollum stiffened at once, and
sniffed, and his eyes went green. He hissed softly but menacingly. He could not see the hobbit, but
now he was on the alert, and he had other senses that the darkness had sharpened: hearing and
smell. He seemed to be crouched right down with his flat hands splayed on the floor, and his head
thrust out, nose almost to the stone. Though he was only a black shadow in the gleam of his own
eyes, Bilbo could see or feel that he was tense as a bowstring, gathered for a spring.
Bilbo almost stopped breathing, and went stiff himself. He was desperate. He must get away,
out of this horrible darkness, while he had any strength left. He must fight. He must stab the foul
thing, put its eyes out, kill it. It meant to kill him. No, not a fair fight. He was invisible now. Gollum
had no sword. Gollum had not actually threatened to kill him, or tried to yet. And he was miserable,
alone, lost. A sudden understanding, a pity mixed with horror, welled up in Bilbo’s heart: a glimpse
of endless unmarked days without light or hope of betterment, hard stone, cold fish, sneaking and
whispering. All these thoughts passed in a flash of a second. He trembled. And then quite suddenly
in another flash, as if lifted by a new strength and resolve, he leaped.
No great leap for a man, but a leap in the dark. Straight over Gollum’s head he jumped, seven
feet forward and three in the air; indeed, had he known it, he only just missed cracking his skull on
the low arch of the passage.
Gollum threw himself backwards, and grabbed as the hobbit flew over him,but too late: his
hands snapped on thin air, and Bilbo, falling fair on his sturdy feet, sped off down the new tunnel.
He did not turn to see what Gollum was doing. There was a hissing and cursing almost at his heels
at first, then it stopped. All at once there came a bloodcurdling shriek, filled with hatred and despair.
Gollum was defeated. He dared go no further. He had lost: lost his prey, and lost, too, the only thing
he had ever cared for, his precious. The cry brought Bilbo’s heart to his mouth, but still he held on.
Now faint as an echo, but menacing, the voice came behind:
“Thief, thief, thief! Baggins! We hates it, we hates it, we hates it for ever!”
Then there was a silence. But that too seemed menacing to Bilbo. “If goblins are so near that
he smelt them,” he thought, “then they’ll have heard his shrieking and cursing. Careful now, or this
way will lead you to worse things.”The passage was low and roughly made. It was not too difficult for the hobbit, except when,
in spite of all care, he stubbed his poor toes again, several times, on nasty jagged stones in the floor.
“A bit low for goblins, at least for the big ones,” thought Bilbo, not knowing that even the big ones,
the ores of the mountains, go along at a great speed stooping low with their hands almost on the
ground.
Soon the passage that had been sloping down began to go up again, and after a while it
climbed steeply. That slowed Bilbo down. But at last the slope stopped, the passage turned a corner,
and dipped down again, and there, at the bottom of a short incline, he saw, filtering round another
corner-a glimpse of light. Not red light, as of fire or lantern, but a pale out-of-doors sort of light.
Then Bilbo began to run.
Scuttling as fast as his legs would carry him he turned the last corner and came suddenly right
into an open space, where the light, after all that time in the dark, seemed dazzlingly bright. Really
it was only a leak of sunshine in through a doorway, where a great door, a stone door, was left
standing open.
Bilbo blinked, and then suddenly he saw the goblins: goblins in full armour with drawn
swords sitting just inside the door, and watching it with wide eyes, and watching the passage that
led to it. They were aroused, alert, ready for anything.
They saw him sooner than he saw them. Yes, they saw him. Whether it was.an accident, or a
last trick of the ring before it took a new master, it was not on his finger. With yells of delight the
goblins rushed upon him. A pang of fear and loss, like an echo of Gollum’s misery, smote Bilbo,
and forgetting even to draw his sword he struck his hands into his pockets. And– there was the ring
still, in his left pocket, and it slipped on his finger. The goblins stopped short. They could not see a
sign of him. He had vanished. They yelled twice as loud as before, but not so delightedly. “Where is
it?” they cried.
“Go back up the passage!” some shouted.
“This way!” some yelled. “That way!” others yelled.
“Look out for the door,” bellowed the captain.
Whistles blew, armour clashed, swords rattled, goblins cursed and swore and ran hither and
thither, falling over one another and getting very angry. There was a terrible outcry, to-do, and
disturbance.
Bilbo was dreadfully frightened, but he had the sense to understand what had happened and to
sneak behind a big barrel which held drink for the goblin-guards, and so get out of the way and
avoid being bumped into, trampled to death, or caught by feel.
“I must get to the door, I must get to the door!” he kept on saying to himself, but it was a long
time before he ventured to try. Then it was like a horrible game of blind-man’s buff. The place was
full of goblins running about, and the poor little hobbit dodged this way and that, was knocked over
by a goblin who could not make out what he had bumped into, scrambled away on all fours, slipped
between the legs of the captain just in time, got up, and ran for the door.
It was still ajar, but a goblin had pushed it nearly to. Bilbo struggled but he could not move it.
He tried to squeeze through the crack. He squeezed and squeezed, and he stuck! It was awful. His
buttons had got wedged on the edge of the door and the door-post. He could see outside into the
open air: there were a few steps running down into a narrow valley between tall mountains; the sun
came out from behind a cloud and shone bright on the outside of the door-but he could not get
through.
Suddenly one of the goblins inside shouted: “There is a shadow by the door. Something is
outside!”
Bilbo’s heart jumped into his mouth. He gave a terrific squirm. Buttons burst off in all
directions. He was through, with a torn coat and waistcoat, leaping down the steps like a goat, while
bewildered goblins were still picking up his nice brass buttons on the doorstep.
Of course they soon came down after him, hooting and hallooing, and hunting among the
trees. But they don’t like the sun: it makes their legs wobble and their heads giddy. They could not
find Bilbo with the ring on, slipping in and out of the shadow of the trees, running quick and quiet,and keeping out of the sun; so soon they went back grumbling and cursing to guard the door. Bilbo
had escaped.
Chapter  
Out of the Frying-Pan into the Fire
Bilbo had escaped the goblins, but he did not know where he was. He had lost hood, cloak,
food, pony, his buttons and his friends. He wandered on and on, till the sun began to sink
westwards-behind the mountains. Their shadows fell across Bilbo’s path, and he looked back. Then
he looked forward and could see before him only ridges and slopes falling towards lowlands and
plains glimpsed occasionally between the trees.
“Good heavens!” he exclaimed. “I seem to have got right to the other side of the Misty
Mountains, right to the edge of the Land Beyond! Where and O where can Gandalf and the dwarves
have got to? I only hope to goodness they are not still back there in the power of the goblins!”
He still wandered on, out of the little high valley, over its edge, and down the slopes beyond;
but all the while a very uncomfortable thought was growing inside him. He wondered whether he
ought not, now he had the magic ring, to go back into the horrible, horrible, tunnels and look for his
friends. He had just made up his mind that it was his duty, that he must turn back-and very
miserable he felt about it-when he heard voices. He stopped and listened. It did not sound like
goblins; so he crept forward carefully. He was on a stony path winding downwards with a rocky
wall. on the left hand; on the other side the ground sloped away and there were dells below the level
of the path overhung with bushes and low trees. In one of these dells under the bushes people were
talking.
He crept still nearer, and suddenly he saw peering between two big boulders a head with a red
hood on: it was Balin doing look-out. He could have clapped and shouted for joy, but he did not. He
had still got the ring on, for fear of meeting something unexpected and unpleasant, and he saw that
Balin was looking straight at him without noticing him.
“I will give them all a surprise,” he thought, as he crawled into the bushes at the edge of the
dell. Gandalf was arguing with the dwarves. They were discussing all that had happened to them in
the tunnels, and wondering and debating what they were to do now. The dwarves were grumbling,
and Gandalf was saying that they could not possibly go on with their journey leaving Mr. Baggins
in the hands of the goblins, without trying to find out if he was alive or dead, and without trying to
rescue him.
“After all he is my friend,” said the wizard, “and not a bad little chap. I feel responsible for
him. I wish to goodness you had not lost him.”
The dwarves wanted to know why he had ever been brought at all, why he could not stick to
his friends and come along with them, and why the wizard had not chosen someone with more
sense. “He has been more trouble than use so far,” said one. “If we have got to’ go back now into
those abominable tunnels to look for him, then drat him, I say.”
Gandalf answered angrily: “I brought him, and I don’t bring things that are of no use. Either
you help me to look for him, or I go and leave you here to get out of the mess as best you can
yourselves. If we can only find him again, you will thank me before all is over. Whatever did you
want to go and drop him for, Dori?”
“You would have dropped him,” said Dori, “if a goblin had suddenly grabbed your leg from
behind in the dark, tripped up your feet, and kicked you in the back!”
“Then why didn’t you pick him up again?”
“Good heavens! Can you ask! Goblins fighting and biting in the dark, everybody falling over
bodies and hitting one another! You nearly chopped off my head with Glamdring, and Thorin Was
stabbing here there and everywhere with Orcrist. All of a sudden you gave one of your blinding
flashes, and we saw the goblins running back yelping. You shouted ‘follow me everybody!’ and
everybody ought to have followed. We thought everybody had. There was no time to count, as you
know quite well, till we had dashed through the gate-guards, out of the lower door, andhelter-skelter down here. And here we are-without the burglar, confusticate him!”
“And here’s the burglar!” said Bilbo stepping down into the middle of them, and slipping off
the ring.
Bless me, how they jumped! Then they shouted with surprise and delight. Gandalf was as
astonished as any of them, but probably more pleased than all the others. He called to Balin and told
him what he thought of a look-out man who let people walk right into them like that without
warning. It is a fact that Bilbo’s reputation went up a very great deal with the dwarves after this. If
they had still doubted that he was really a first-class burglar, in spite of Gandalf’s words, they
doubted no longer. Balin was the most puzzled of all; but everyone said it was a very clever bit of
work.
Indeed Bilbo was so pleased with their praise that he just chuckled inside and said nothing
whatever about the ring; and when they asked him how he did it, he said: “O, just crept along, you
know-very carefully and quietly.”
“Well, it is the first time that even a mouse has crept along carefully and quietly under my
very nose and not been spotted,” said Balin, “and I take off my hood to you.” Which he did.
“Balin at your service,” said he.
“Your servant, Mr. Baggins,” said Bilbo.
Then they wanted to know all about his adventures after they had lost him, and he sat down
and told them everything-except about the finding of the ring (“not just now” he thought). They
were particularly interested in the riddle-competition, and shuddered most appreciatively at his
description of Gollum.
“And then I couldn’t think of any other question with him sitting beside me,” ended Bilbo;
“so I said ‘what’s in my pocket?’ And he couldn’t guess in three goes. So I said: ‘what about your
promise? Show me the way out!’ But he came at me to kill me, and I ran, and fell over, and he
missed me in the dark. Then I followed him, because I heard him talking to himself. He thought I
really knew the way out, and so he was making for it. And then he sat down in the entrance, and I
could not get by. So I jumped over him and escaped, and ran down to the gate.”
“What about guards?” they asked. “Weren’t there any?” “O yes! lots of them; but I dodged
‘em. I got stuck in the door, which was only open a crack, and I lost lots of buttons,” he said sadly
looking at his torn clothes. “But I squeezed through all right-and here I am.”
The dwarves looked at him with quite a new respect, when he talked about dodging guards,
jumping over Gollum, and squeezing through, as if it was not very difficult or very alarming.
“What did I tell you?” said Gandalf laughing. “Mr. Baggins has more about him than you
guess.” He gave Bilbo a queer look from under his bushy eyebrows, as he said this, and the hobbit
wondered if he guessed at the part of his tale that he had left out.
Then he had questions of his own to ask, for if Gandalf had explained it all by now to the
dwarves, Bilbo had not heard it. He wanted to know how the wizard had turned up again, and where
they had all got to now. The wizard, to tell the truth, never minded explaining his cleverness more
than once, so now he had told Bilbo that both he and Elrond had been well aware of the presence of
evil goblins in that part of the mountains. But their main gate used to come out on a different pass,
one more easy to travel by, so that they often caught people benighted near their gates. Evidently
people had given up going that way, and the goblins must have opened their new entrance at the top
of the pass the dwarves had taken, quite recently, because it had been found quite safe up to now.
“I must see if I can’t find a more or less decent giant to block it up again,” said Gandalf, “or
soon there will be no getting over the mountains at all.”
As soon as Gandalf had heard Bilbo’s yell he realized what had happened. In the flash which
killed the goblins that were grabbing him he had nipped inside the crack, just as it snapped to. He
followed after the drivers and prisoners right to the edge of the great hall, and there he sat down and
worked up the best magic he could in the shadows.
“A very ticklish business, it was,” he said. “Touch and go!” But, of course, Gandalf had made
a special study of bewitchments with fire and lights (even the hobbit had never forgotten the magic
fireworks at Old Took’s midsummer-eve parties, as you remember). The rest we all know – exceptthat Gandalf knew all about the back-door, as the goblins called the lower gate, where Bilbo lost his
buttons. As a matter of fact it was well known to anybody who was acquainted with this part of the
mountains; but it took a wizard to keep his head in the tunnels and guide them in the right direction.
“They made that gate ages ago,” he said, “partly for a way of escape, if they needed one;
partly as a way out into the lands beyond, where they still come in the dark and do great damage.
They guard it always and no one has ever managed to block it up. They will guard it doubly after
this,” he laughed. All the others laughed too. After all they had lost a good deal, but they had killed
the Great Goblin and a great many others besides, and they had all escaped, so they might be said to
have had the best of it so far. But the wizard called them to their senses. “We must be getting on at
once, now we are a little rested,” he said. “They will be out after us in hundreds when night comes
on; and already shadows are lengthening. They can smell our footsteps for hours and hours after we
have passed. We must be miles on before dusk. There will be a bit of moon, if it keeps fine, and that
is lucky. Not that they mind the moon much, but it will give us a little light to steer by.”
“O yes!” he said in answer to more questions from the hobbit. “You lose track of time inside
goblin-tunnels. Today’s Thursday, and it was Monday night or Tuesday morning that we were
captured. We have gone miles and miles, and come right down through the heart of the mountains,
and are now on the other side-quite a short cut. But we are not at the point to which our pass would
have brought us; we are too far to the North, and have some awkward country ahead. And we are
still pretty high up. Let’s get on!”
“I am so dreadfully hungry,” groaned Bilbo, who was suddenly aware that he had not had a
meal since the night before the night before last. Just think of that for a hobbit! His stomach felt all
empty and loose and his legs all wobbly, now that the excitement was over.
“Can’t help it,” said Gandalf, “unless you like to go back and ask the goblins nicely to let you
have your pony back and your luggage.” “No thank you!” said Bilbo.
“Very well then, we must just tighten our belts and trudge on – or we shall be made into
supper, and that will be much worse than having none ourselves.”
As they went on Bilbo looked from side to side for something to eat; but the blackberries were
still only in flower, and of course there were no nuts, nor even hawthorn-berries. He nibbled a bit of
sorrel, and he drank from a small mountain-stream that crossed the path, and he ate three wild
strawberries that he found on its bank, but it was not much good. They still went on and on. The
rough path disappeared. The bushes, and the long grasses, between the boulders, the patches of
rabbit-cropped turf, the thyme and the sage and the marjoram, and the yellow rockroses all
vanished, and they found themselves at the top of a wide steep slope of fallen stones, the remains of
a landslide. When they began to go down this, rubbish and small pebbles rolled away from their
feet; soon larger bits of split stone went clattering down and started other pieces below them
slithering and rolling; then lumps of rocks were disturbed and bounded off, crashing down with a
dust and a noise. Before long the whole slope above them and below them seemed on the move, and
they were sliding away, huddled all together, in a fearful confusion of slipping, rattling, cracking
slabs and stones. It was the trees at the bottom that saved them. They slid into the edge of a
climbing wood of pines that here stood right up the mountain slope from the deeper darker forests
of the valleys below. Some caught hold of the trunks and swung themselves into lower branches,
some (like the little hobbit) got behind a tree to shelter from the onslaught of the rocks. Soon the
danger was over, the slide had stopped, and the last faint crashes could be heard as the largest of the
disturbed stones went bounding and spinning among the bracken and the pine-roots far below.
“Well! that has got us on a bit,” said Gandalf; “and even goblins tracking us will have a job to
come down here quietly.” “I daresay,” grumbled Bombur; “but they won’t find it difficult to send
stones bouncing down on our heads.” The dwarves (and Bilbo) were feeling far from happy, and
were rubbing their bruised and damaged legs and feet. “Nonsense! We are going to turn aside here
out of the path of the slide. We must be quick! Look at the light!” The sun had long gone behind the
mountains. Already the shadows were deepening about them, though far away through the trees and
over the black tops of those growing lower down they could still see the evening lights on the plains
beyond. They limped along now as fast as they were able down the gentle slopes of a pine forest ina slanting path leading steadily southwards. At times they were pushing through a sea of bracken
with tall fronds rising right above the hobbit’s head; at times they were marching along quiet as
quiet over a floor of pine-needles; and all the while the forest-gloom got heavier and the
forest-silence deeper. There was no wind that evening to bring even a sea-sighing into the branches
of the trees.
“Must we go any further?” asked Bilbo, when it was so dark that he could only just see
Thorin’s beard wagging beside him, and so quiet that he could hear the dwarves’ breathing like a
loud noise. “My toes are all bruised and bent, and my legs ache, and my stomach is wagging like an
empty sack.” “A bit further,” said Gandalf.
After what seemed ages further they came suddenly to an opening where no trees grew. The
moon was up and was shining into the clearing. Somehow it struck all of them as not at all a nice
place, although there was nothing wrong to see.
All of a sudden they heard a howl away down hill, a long shuddering howl.
It was answered by another away to the right and a good deal nearer to them, then by another
not far away to the left. It was wolves howling at the moon,wolves gathering together!
There were no wolves living near Mr. Baggins’ hole at home, but he knew that noise. He had
had it described to him often enough in tales. One of his elder cousins (on the Took side), who had
been a great traveller, used to imitate it to frighten him. To hear it out in the forest under the moon
was too much for Bilbo. Even magic rings are not much use against wolves-especially against the
evil packs that lived under the shadow of the goblin-infested mountains, over the Edge of the Wild
on the borders of the unknown. Wolves of that sort smell keener than goblins, and do not need to
see you to catch you!
“What shall we do, what shall we do!” he cried. “Escaping goblins to be caught by wolves!”
he said, and it became a proverb, though we now say ‘out of the frying-pan into the fire’ in the same
sort of uncomfortable situations. “Up the trees quick!” cried Gandalf; and they ran to the trees at the
edge of the glade, hunting for those that had branches fairly low, or were slender enough to swarm
up. They found them as quick as ever they could, you can guess; and up they went as high as ever
they could trust the branches. You would have laughed (from a safe distance), if you had seen the
dwarves sitting up in the trees with their beards dangling down, like old gentlemen gone cracked
and playing at being boys. Fili and Kili were at the top of a tall larch like an enormous Christmas
tree. Dori, Nori, On, Oin, and Gloin were more comfortable in a huge pine with regular branches
sticking out at intervals like the spokes of a wheel. Bifur, Bofur, Bombur, and Thorin were in
another. Dwalin and Balin had swarmed up a tall slender fir with few branches and were trying to
find a place to sit in the greenery of the topmost boughs. Gandalf, who was a good deal taller than
the others, had found a tree into which they could not climb, a large pine standing at the very edge
of the glade. He was quite hidden in its boughs, but you could see his eyes gleaming in the moon as
he peeped out.
And Bilbo? He could not get into any tree, and was scuttling about from trunk to trunk, like a
rabbit that has lost its hole and has a dog after it. “You’ve left the burglar behind again}” said Nori
to Dori looking down. “I can’t be always carrying burglars on my back,” said Dori, “down tunnels
and up trees! What do you think I am? A porter?” “He’ll be eaten if we don’t ‘do something,” said
Thorin, for there were howls all around them now, getting nearer and nearer. “Dori!” he called, for
Dori was lowest down in the easiest tree, “be quick, and give Mr. Baggins a hand up!”
Dori was really a decent fellow in spite of his grumbling. Poor Bilbo could not reach his hand
even when he climbed down to the bottom branch and hung his arm down as far as ever he could.
So Dori actually climbed out of the tree and let Bilbo scramble up and stand on his back. Just at that
moment the wolves trotted howling into the clearing. All of a sudden there were hundreds of eyes
looking at them. Still Dori did not let Bilbo down. He waited till he had clambered off his shoulders
into the branches, and then he jumped for the branches himself. Only just in time! A wolf snapped–
at his cloak as he swung up, and nearly got him. In a minute there was a whole pack of them
yelping all round the tree and leaping up at the trunk, with eyes blazing and tongues hanging out.
But even the wild Wargs (for so the evil wolves over the Edge of the Wild were named) cannotclimb trees. For a time they were safe. ‘Luckily it was warm and not windy. Trees are not very
comfortable to sit in for long at any time; but in the cold and the wind, with wolves all round below
waiting for you, they can be perfectly miserable places.
This glade in the ring of trees was evidently a meeting-place of the wolves. More and more
kept coming in. They left guards at the foot of the tree in which Dori and Bilbo were, and then went
sniffling about till they had smelt out every tree that had anyone in it. These they guarded too, while
all the rest (hundreds and hundreds it seemed) went and sat in a great circle in the glade; and in the
middle of the circle was a great grey wolf. He spoke to them in the dreadful language of the Wargs.
Gandalf understood it. Bilbo did not, but it sounded terrible to him, and as if all their talk was about
cruel and wicked things, as it was. Every now and then all the Wargs in the circle would answer
their grey chief all together, and their dreadful clamour almost made the hobbit fall out of his
pine-tree.
I will tell you what Gandalf heard, though Bilbo did not understand it. The Wargs and the
goblins often helped one another in wicked deeds. Goblins do not usually venture very far from
their mountains, unless they are driven out and are looking for new homes, or are marching to war
(which I am glad to say has not happened for a long while). But in those days they sometimes used
to go on raids, especially to get food or slaves to work for them. Then they often got the Wargs to
help and shared the plunder with them. Sometimes they rode on wolves like men do on horses. Now
it seemed that a great goblin-raid had been planned for that very night. The Wargs had come to meet
the goblins and the goblins were late. The reason, no doubt, was the death of the Great Goblin, and
all the excitement caused by the dwarves and Bilbo and the wizard, for whom they were probably
still hunting.
In spite of the dangers of this far land bold men had of late been making their way back into it
from the South, cutting down trees, and building themselves places to live in among the more
pleasant woods in the valleys and along the river-shores. There were many of them, and they were
brave and well-armed, and even the Wargs dared not attack them if there were many together, or in
the bright day. But now they had planned with the goblins’ help to come by night upon some of the
villages nearest the mountains. If their plan had been carried out, there would have been none left
there next day; all would have been killed except the few the goblins kept from the wolves and
carried back as prisoners to their caves.
This was dreadful talk to listen to, not only because of the brave woodmen and their wives
and children, but also because of the danger which now threatened Gandalf and his friends. The
Wargs were angry and puzzled at finding them here in their very meeting-place. They thought they
were friends of the woodmen, and were come to spy on them, and would take news of their plans
down into the valleys, and then the goblins and the wolves would have to fight a terrible battle
instead of capturing prisoners and devouring people waked suddenly from their sleep. So the Wargs
had no intention of going away and letting the people up the trees escape, at any rate not until
morning. And long before that, they said, goblin soldiers would be coming down from the
mountains; and goblins can climb trees, or cut them down. Now you can understand why Gandalf,
listening to their growling and yelping, began to be dreadfully afraid, wizard though he was, and to
feel that they were in a very bad place, and had not yet escaped at all. All the same he was not going
to let them have it all their own way, though he could not do very much stuck up in a tall tree with
wolves all round on the ground below. He gathered the huge pinecones from the branches of his
tree. Then he set one alight with bright blue fire, and threw it whizzing down among the circle of
the wolves. It struck one on the back, and immediately his shaggy coat caught fire, and he was
leaping to and fro yelping horribly. Then another came and another, one in blue flames, one in red,
another in green. They burst on the ground in the middle of the circle and went off in coloured
sparks and smoke. A specially large one hit the chief wolf on the nose, and he leaped in the air ten
feet, and then rushed round and round the circle biting and snapping even at the other wolves in his
anger and fright.
The dwarves and Bilbo shouted and cheered. The rage of the wolves was terrible to see, and
the commotion they made filled all the forest. Wolves are afraid of fire at all times, but this was amost horrible and uncanny fire. If a spark got in their coats it stuck and burned into them, and
unless they rolled over quick they were soon all in flames. Very soon all about the glade wolves
were rolling over and over to put out the sparks on their backs, while those that were burning were
running about howling and setting others alight, till their own friends chased them away and they
fled off down the slopes crying and yammering and looking for water.
“What’s all this uproar in the forest tonight?” said the Lord of the Eagles. He was sitting,
black in the moonlight, on the top of a lonely pinnacle of rock at the eastern edge of the mountains.
“I hear wolves’ voices! Are the goblins at mischief in the woods?”
He swept up into the air, and immediately two of his guards from the rocks at either hand
leaped up to follow him. They circled up in the sky and looked down upon the ring of the Wargs, a
tiny spot far far below. But eagles have keen eyes and can see small things at a great distance. The
lord of the eagles of the Misty Mountains had eyes that could look at the sun unblinking, and could
see a rabbit moving on the ground a mile below even in the moonlight. So though he could not see
the people in the trees, he could make out the commotion among the wolves and see the tiny flashes
of fire, and hear the howling and yelping come up faint from far beneath him. Also he could see the
glint of the moon on goblin spears and helmets, as long lines of the wicked folk crept down the
hillsides from their gate and wound into the wood. Eagles are not kindly birds. Some are cowardly
and cruel. But the ancient race of the northern mountains were the greatest of all birds; they were
proud and strong and noble-hearted. They did not love goblins, or fear them. When they took any
notice of them at all (which was seldom, for they did not eat such creatures ), they swooped on them
and drove them shrieking back to their caves, and stopped whatever wickedness they were doing.
The goblins hated the eagles and feared them, but could not reach their lofty seats, or drive them
from the mountains.
Tonight the Lord of the Eagles was filled with curiosity to know what was afoot; so he
summoned many other eagles to him, and they flew away from the mountains, and slowly circling
ever round and round they came down, down, down towards the ring of the wolves and the
meeting-place of the goblins. A very good thing too! Dreadful things had been going on down there.
The wolves that had caught fire and fled into the forest had set it alight in several places. It was high
summer, and on this eastern side of the mountains there had been little rain for some time.
Yellowing bracken, fallen branches, deep-piled pine-needles, and here and there dead trees, were
soon in flames. All round the clearing of the Wargs fire was leaping. But the wolf-guards did not
leave the trees. Maddened and angry they were leaping and howling round the trunks, and cursing
the dwarves in their horrible language, with their tongues hanging out, and their eyes shining as red
and fierce as the flames. Then suddenly goblins came running up yelling. They thought a battle with
the woodmen was going on; but they goon learned what had really happened. Some of them
actually sat down and laughed. Others waved their spears and clashed the shafts against their
shields. Goblins are not afraid of fire, and they soon had a plan which seemed to them most
amusing. Some got all the wolves together in a pack. Some stacked fern and brushwood round the
tree-trunks. Others rushed round and stamped and beat, and beat and stamped, until nearly all the
flames were put out-but they did not put out the fire nearest to the trees where the dwarves were.
That fire they fed with leaves and dead branches and bracken. Soon they had a ring of smoke and
flame all round the dwarves, a ring which they kept from spreading outwards; but it closed slowly
in, till the running fire was licking the fuel piled under the trees. Smoke was in Bilbo’s eyes, he
could feel the heat of the flames; and through the reek he could see the goblins dancing round and
round in a circle like people round a midsummer bonfire. Outside the ring of dancing warriors with
spears and axes stood the wolves at a respectful distance, watching and waiting.
He could hear the goblins beginning a horrible song:
“Fifteen birds in five firtrees, their feathers were fanned in a fiery breeze!
But, funny little birds, they had no wings!
O what shall we do with the funny little things?
Roast ‘em alive, or stew them in a pot,fry them, boil them and eat them hot?”Then they stopped and shouted out: “Fly away little birds! Fly away if you can! Come down
little birds, or you will get roasted in your nests! Sing, sing little birds! Why don’t you sing?”
“Go away! little boys!” shouted Gandalf in answer. “It isn’t bird-nesting time. Also naughty
little boys that play with fire get punished.” He said it to make them angry, and to show them he
was not frightened of them-though of course he was, wizard though he was. But they took no
notice, and they went on singing.
“Burn, burn tree and fern!
Shrivel and scorch! A fizzling torch
To light the night for our delight,
Ya hey!
Bake and toast ‘em, fry and roast ‘em
till beards blaze, and eyes glaze;
till hair smells and skins crack,
fat melts, and bones black
in cinders lie
beneath the sky!
So dwarves shall die,
and light the night for our delight,
Ya hey!
Ya-harri-heyl
Ya hoy!”
And with that Ya hoy! the flames were under Gandalf’s tree. In a moment it spread to the
others. The bark caught fire, the lower branches cracked. Then Gandalf climbed to the top of his
tree. The sudden splendour flashed from his wand like lightning, as he got ready to spring down
from on high right among the spears of the goblins. That would have been the end of him, though
he would probably have killed many of them as he came hurtling down like a thunderbolt. But he
never leaped.
Just at that moment the Lord of the Eagles swept down from above, seized him in his talons,
and was gone.
There was a howl of anger and surprise from the goblins. Loud cried the Lord of the Eagles,
to whom Gandalf had now spoken. Back swept the great birds that were with him, and down they
came like huge black shadows. The wolves yammered and gnashed their teeth; the goblins yelled
and stamped with rage, and flung their heavy spears in the air in vain. Over them swooped the
eagles; the dark rush of their beating wings smote them to the floor or drove them far away; their
talons tore at goblin faces. Other birds flew to the tree-tops and seized the dwarves, who were
scrambling up now as far as ever they dared to go.
Poor little Bilbo was very nearly left behind again! He just managed to catch hold of Dori’s
legs, as Dori was borne off last of all; and they went together above the tumult and the burning,
Bilbo swinging in the air with his arms nearly breaking.
Now far below the goblins and the wolves were scattering far and wide in the woods. A few
eagles were still circling and sweeping above the battle-ground. The flames about the trees sprang
suddenly up above the highest branches. They went up in crackling fire. There was a sudden flurry
of sparks and smoke. Bilbo had escaped only just in time!
Soon the light of the burning was faint below, a red twinkle on the black floor; and they were
high up in the sky, rising all the time in strong sweeping circles. Bilbo never forgot that flight,
clinging onto Dori’s ankles.
He moaned “my arms, my arms!”; but Dori groaned “my poor legs, my poor legs!” At the best
of times heights made Bilbo giddy. He used to turn queer if he looked over the edge of quite a little
cliff; and he had never liked ladders, let alone trees (never having had to escape from wolves
before). So you can imagine how his head swam now, when he looked down between his dangling
toes and saw the dark lands opening wide underneath him, touched here and there with the light of
the moon on a hill-side rock or a stream in the plains.The pale peaks of the mountains were coming nearer, moonlit spikes of rock sticking out of
black shadows. Summer or not, it seemed very cold. He shut his eyes and wondered if he could hold
on any longer. Then he imagined what would happen if he did not. He felt sick. The flight ended
only just in time for him, just before his arms gave way. He loosed Dori’s ankles with a gasp and
fell onto the rough platform of an eagle’s eyrie. There he lay without speaking, and his thoughts
were a mixture of surprise at being saved from the fire, and fear lest he fell off that narrow place
into the deep shadows on either side. He was feeling very queer indeed in his head by this time after
the dreadful adventures of the last three days with next to nothing to eat, and he found himself
saying aloud: “Now I know what a piece of bacon feels like when it is suddenly picked out of the
pan on a fork and put back on the shelf!”
“No you don’t!” be heard Dori answering, “because the bacon knows that it will get back in
the pan sooner or later; and it is to be hoped we shan’t. Also eagles aren’t forks!”
“O no! Not a bit like storks-forks, I mean,” said Bilbo sitting up and looking anxiously at the
eagle who was perched close by. He wondered what other nonsense he had been saying, and if the
eagle would think it rude. You ought not to be rude to an eagle, when you are only the size of a
hobbit, and are up in his eyrie at night!
The eagle only sharpened his beak on a stone and trimmed his feathers and took no notice.
Soon another eagle flew up. “The Lord of the Eagles bids you to bring your prisoners to the
Great Shelf,” he cried and was off again. The other seized Dori in his claws and flew away with him
into the night leaving Bilbo all alone. He had just strength to wonder what the messenger had meant
by ‘prisoners,’ and to begin to think of being torn up for supper like a rabbit, when his own turn
came. The eagle came back, seized him in his talons by the back of his coat, and swooped off. This
time he flew only a short way. Very soon Bilbo was laid down, trembling with fear, on a wide shelf
of rock on the mountain-side. There was no path down on to it save by flying; and no path down off
it except by jumping over a precipice. There he found all the others sitting with their backs to the
mountain wall. The Lord of the Eagles also was there and was speaking to Gandalf.
It seemed that Bilbo was not going to be eaten after all. The wizard and the eagle-lord
appeared to know one another slightly, and even to be on friendly terms. As a matter of fact
Gandalf, who had often been in the mountains, had once rendered a service to the eagles and healed
their lord from an arrow-wound. So you see ‘prisoners’ had meant ‘prisoners rescued from the
goblins’ only, and not captives of the eagles. As Bilbo listened to the talk of Gandalf he realized that
at last they were going to escape really and truly from the dreadful mountains. He was discussing
plans with the Great Eagle for carrying the dwarves and himself and Bilbo far away and setting
them down well on their journey across the plains below.
The Lord of the Eagles would not take them anywhere near where men lived. “They would
shoot at us with their great bows of yew,” he said, “for they would think we were after their sheep.
And at other times they would be right. No! we are glad to cheat the goblins of their sport, and glad
to repay our thanks to you, but we will not risk ourselves for dwarves in the southward plains.”
“Very well,” said Gandalf. “Take us where and as far as you will! We are already deeply
obliged to you. But in the meantime we are famished with hunger.”
“I am nearly dead of it,” said Bilbo in a weak little voice that nobody heard.
“That can perhaps be mended,” said the Lord of the Eagles. Later on you might have seen a
bright fire on the shelf of rock and the figures of the dwarves round it cooking and making a fine
roasting smell. The eagles had brought up dry boughs for fuel, and they had brought rabbits, hares,
and a small sheep. The dwarves managed all the preparations. Bilbo was too weak to help, and
anyway he was not much good at skinning rabbits or cutting up meat, being used to having it
delivered by the butcher all ready to cook. Gandalf, too, was lying down after doing his part in
setting the fire going, since Oin and Gloin had lost their tinder-boxes. (Dwarves have never taken to
matches even yet.)
So ended the adventures of the Misty Mountains. Soon Bilbo’s stomach was feeling full and
comfortable again, and he felt he could sleep contentedly, though really he would have liked a loaf
and butter better than bits of meat toasted on sticks. He slept curled up on the hard rock moresoundly than ever he had done on his feather-bed in his own little hole at home. But all night he
dreamed of his own house and wandered in his sleep into all his different rooms looking for
something that he could not find nor remember what it looked like.
Chapter  
Queer Lodgings
The next morning Bilbo woke up with the early sun in his eyes. He jumped up to look at the
time and to go and put his kettle on-and found he was not home at all. So he sat down and wished in
vain for a wash and a brush. He did not get either, nor tea nor toast nor bacon for his breakfast, only
cold mutton and rabbit. And after that he had to get ready for a fresh start. This time he was allowed
to climb on to an eagle’s back and cling between his wings. The air rushed over him and he shut his
eyes. The dwarves were crying farewells and promising to repay the lord of the eagles if ever they
could, as off rose fifteen great birds from the mountain’s side. The sun was still close to the eastern
edge of things. The morning was cool, and mists were in the valleys and hollows and twined here
and there about the peaks and pinnacles of the hills. Bilbo opened an eye to peep and saw that the
birds were already high up and the world was far away, and the mountains were falling back behind
them into the distance. He shut his eyes again and held on tighter.
“Don’t pinch!” said his eagle. “You need not be frightened like a rabbit, even if you look
rather like one. It is a fair morning with little wind. What is finer than flying?”
Bilbo would have liked to say: “A warm bath and late breakfast on the lawn afterwards;” but
he thought it better to say nothing at all, and to let go his clutch just a tiny bit.
After a good while the eagles must have seen the point they were making for, ‘even from their
great height, for they began to go down circling round in great spirals. They did this for a long
while, and at last the hobbit opened his eyes again. The earth was much nearer, and below them
were trees that looked like oaks and elms, and wide grass lands, and a river running through it all.
But cropping out of the ground, right in the path of the stream which looped itself about it, was a
great rock, almost a hill of stone, like a last outpost of the distant mountains, or a huge piece cast
miles into the plain by some giant among giants.
Quickly now to the top of this rock the eagles swooped one by one and set down their
passengers.
“Farewell!” they cried, “wherever you fare, till your eyries receive you at the journey’s end!”
That is the polite thing to say among eagles. “May the wind under your wings bear you where the
sun sails and the moon walks,” answered Gandalf, who knew the correct reply. And so they parted.
And though the lord of the eagles became in after days the King of All Birds and wore a golden
crown, and his fifteen chieftains golden collars (made of the gold that the dwarves gave them),
Bilbo never saw them again-except high and far off in the battle of Five Armies. But as that comes
in at the end of this tale we will say no more about it just now. There was a flat space on the top of
the hill of stone and a well worn path with many steps leading down it to the river, across which a
ford of huge flat stones led to the grass-land beyond the stream. There was a little cave (a
wholesome one with a pebbly floor) at the foot of the steps and near the end of the stony ford. Here
the party gathered and discussed what was to be done.
“I always meant to see you all safe (if possible) over the mountains,” said the wizard, “and
now by good management and good luck I have done it. Indeed we are now a good deal further east
than I ever meant to come with you, for after all this is not my adventure. I may look in on it again
before it is all over, but in the meanwhile I have some other pressing business to attend to.”
The dwarves groaned and looked most distressed, and Bilbo wept. They had begun to think
Gandalf was going in come all the way and would always be there to help them out of difficulties.
“I am not going to disappear this very instant,” said he. “I can give you a day or two more. Probably
I can help you out of your present plight, and I need a little help myself. We have no food, and no
baggage, and no ponies to ride; and you don’t know where you are. Now I can tell you that. You are
still some miles north of the path which we should have been following, if we had not left themountain pass in a hurry. Very few people live in these parts, unless they have come here since I
was last down this way, which is some years ago. But there is somebody that I know of, who lives
not far away. That Somebody made the steps on the great rock-the Carrock I believe he calls it. He
does not come here often, certainly not in the daytime, and it is no good waiting for him. In fact it
would be very dangerous. We must go and find him; and if all goes well at our meeting, I think I
shall be off and wish you like the eagles ‘farewell wherever you fare!’ “ They begged him not to
leave them. They offered him dragon-gold and silver and jewels, but he would not change his mind.
“We shall see, we shall see!” he said, “and I think I have earned already some of your
dragon-gold – when you have got it.”
After that they stopped pleading. Then they took off their clothes and bathed in the river,
which was shallow and clear and stony at the ford. When they had dried in the sun, which was now
strong and warm, they were refreshed, if still sore and a little hungry. Soon they crossed the ford
(carrying the hobbit), and then began to march through the long green grass and down the lines of
the wide-armed oaks and the tall elms.
“And why is it called the Carrock?” asked Bilbo as he went along at the wizard’s side.
“He called it the Carrock, because carrock is his word for it. He calls things like that carrocks,
and this one is the Carrock because it is the only one near his home and he knows it well.”
“Who calls it? Who knows it?”
“The Somebody I spoke of-a very great person. You must all be very polite when I introduce
you. I shall introduce you slowly, two by two, I think; and you must be careful not to annoy him, or
heaven knows what will happen. He can be appalling when he is angry, though he is kind enough if
humoured. Still I warn you he gets angry easily.”
The dwarves all gathered round when they heard the wizard talking like this to Bilbo. “Is that
the person you are taking us to now?” they asked. “Couldn’t you find someone more
easy-tempered? Hadn’t you better explain it all a bit clearer?”-and so on.
“Yes it certainly is! No I could not! And I was explaining very carefully,” answered the wizard
crossly. “If you must know more, his name is Beorn. He is very strong, and he is a skin-changer.”
“What! a furrier, a man that calls rabbits conies, when he doesn’t turn their skins into
squirrels?” asked Bilbo.
“Good gracious heavens, no, no, NO, NO!” said Gandalf. “Don’t be a fool Mr. Baggins if you
can help it; and in the name of all wonder don’t mention the word furrier again as long as you are
within a hundred miles of his house, nor, rug, cape, tippet, muff, nor any other such unfortunate
word! He is a skin-changer. He changes his skin; sometimes he is a huge black bear, sometimes he
is a great strong black-haired man with huge arms and a great beard. I cannot tell you much more,
though that ought to be enough. Some say that he is a bear descended from the great and ancient
bears of the mountains that lived there before the giants came. Others say that he is a man
descended from the first men who lived before Smaug or the other dragons came into this part of
the world, and before the goblins came into the hills out of the North. I cannot say, though I fancy
the last is the true tale. He is not the sort of person to ask questions of.
“At any rate he is under no enchantment but his own. He lives in an oak-wood and has a great
wooden house; and as a man he keeps cattle and horses which are nearly is marvellous as himself.
They work for him and talk to him. He does not eat them; neither does he hunt or eat wild animals.
He keeps hives and hives of great fierce bees, and lives most on cream and honey. As a bear he
ranges far and wide. I once saw him sitting all alone on the top of the Carrock at night watching the
moon sinking towards the Misty Mountains, and I heard him growl in the tongue of bears; ‘The day
will come when they will perish and I shall go back!’ That is why I believe he once came from the
mountains himself.”
Bilbo and the dwarves had now plenty to think about, and they asked no more questions. They
still had a long way to walk before them. Up slope and down dale they plodded. It grew very hot.
Sometimes they rested under the trees, and then Bilbo felt so hungry that he would have eaten
acorns, if any had been ripe enough yet to have fallen to the ground. It was the middle of the
afternoon before they noticed that great patches of flowers had begun to spring up, all the samekinds growing together as if they had been planted. Especially there was clover, waving patches of
cockscomb clover, and purple clover, and wide stretches of short white sweet honey-smelling
clover. There was a buzzing and a whirring and a droning in the air. Bees were busy everywhere.
And such bees! Bilbo had never seen anything like them.
“If one was to sting me,” he thought, “I should swell up as big again as I am!”
They were bigger than hornets. The drones were bigger than your thumb, a good deal, and the
bands of yellow on their deep black bodies shone like fiery gold.
“We are getting near,” said Gandalf. “We are on the edge of his bee-pastures.”
After a while they came to a belt of tall and very ancient oaks, and beyond these to a high
thorn-hedge through which you could neither see nor scramble.
“You had better wait here,” said the wizard to the dwarves; “and when I call or whistle begin
to come after me – you will see the way I go-but only in pairs, mind, about five minutes between
each pair of you. Bombur is fattest and will do for two, he had better come alone and last. Come on
Mr. Baggins! There is a gate somewhere round this way.” And with that he went off along the hedge
taking the frightened hobbit with him.
They soon came to a wooden gate, high and broad, beyond which they could see gardens and
a cluster of low wooden buildings, some thatched and made of unshaped logs; barns, stables, sheds,
and a long low wooden house. Inside on the southward side of the great hedge were rows and rows
of hives with bell-shaped tops made of straw. The noise of the giant bees flying to and fro and
crawling in and out filled all the air.
The wizard and the hobbit pushed open the heavy creaking gate and went down a wide track
towards the house. Some horses, very sleek and well-groomed, trotted up across the grass and
looked at them intently with very intelligent faces; then off they galloped to the buildings.
“They have gone to tell him of the arrival of strangers,” said Gandalf. Soon they reached a
courtyard, three walls of which were formed by the wooden house and its two long wings. In the
middle there was lying a great oak-trunk with many lopped branches beside it. Standing near was a
huge man with a thick black beard and’ hair, and great bare arms and legs with knotted muscles. He
was clothed in a tunic of wool down to his knees, and was leaning on a large axe.
The horses were standing by him with their noses at his shoulder.
“Ugh! here they are!” he said to the horses. “They don’t look dangerous. You can be off!” He
laughed a great rolling laugh, put down his axe and came forward.
“Who are you and what do you want?” he asked gruffly, standing in front of them and
towering tall above Gandalf.
As for Bilbo he could easily have trotted through his legs without ducking his head to miss the
fringe of the man’s brown tunic. “I am Gandalf,” said the wizard.
“Never heard of him,” growled the man, “And what’s this little fellow?” he said, stooping
down to frown at the hobbit with his bushy eyebrows. “That is Mr. Baggins, a hobbit of good family
and unimpeachable reputation,” said Gandalf. Bilbo bowed. He had no hat to take off, and was
painfully conscious of his many missing buttons. “I am a wizard,” continued Gandalf. “I have heard
of you, if you have not heard of me; but perhaps you have heard of my good cousin Radagast who
lives near the Southern borders of Mirkwood?”
“Yes; not a bad fellow as wizards go, I believe. I used to see him now and again,” said Beorn.
“Well, now I know who you are, or who you say you are. What do you want?”
“To tell you the truth, we have lost our luggage and nearly lost our way, and are rather in need
of help, or at least advice. I may say we have had rather a bad time with goblins in the mountains.”
“Goblins?” said the big man less gruffly. “O ho, so you’ve been having trouble with them
have you? What did you go near them for?” “We did not mean to. They surprised us at night in a
pass which we had to cross, we were coming out of the Lands over West into these countries-it is a
long tale.”
“Then you had better come inside and tell me some of it, if it won’t take all day,” said the man
leading the way through a dark door that opened out of the courtyard into the house.
Following him they found themselves in a wide hall with a fire-place in the middle. Though itwas summer there was a wood-fire burning and the smoke was rising to the blackened rafters in
search of the way out through an opening in the roof. They passed through this dim hall, lit only by
the fire and the hole above it, and came through another smaller door into a sort of veranda propped
on wooden posts made of single tree-trunks. It faced south and was still warm and filled with the
light of the westering sun which slanted into it, and fell golden on the garden full of flowers that
came right up to the steps.
Here they sat on wooden benches while Gandalf began his tale, and Bilbo swung his dangling
legs and looked at the flowers in the garden, wondering what their names could be, as he had never
seen half of them before.
“I was coming over the mountains with a friend or two...” said the wizard.
“Or two? I can only see one, and a little one at that,” said Beorn. “Well to tell you the truth, I
did not like to bother you with a lot of us, until I found out if you were busy. I will give a call, if I
may.” “Go on, call away!”
So Gandalf gave a long shrill whistle, and presently Thorin and Dori came round the house by
the garden path and stood bowing low before them. “One or three you meant, I see!” said Beorn.
“But these aren’t hobbits, they are dwarves!”
“Thorin Oakenshield, at your service! Dori at your service!” said the two dwarves bowing
again.
“I don’t need your service, thank you,” said Beorn, “but I expect you need mine. I am not
over fond of dwarves; but if it is true you are Thorin (son of Thrain, son of Thror, I believe), and
that your companion is respectable, and that you are enemies of goblins and are not up to any
mischief in my lands-what are you up to, by the way?” “They are on their way to visit the land of
their fathers, away east beyond Mirkwood,” put in Gandalf, “and it is entirely an accident that we
are in your lands at all. We were crossing by the High Pass that should have brought us to the road
that lies to the south of your country, when we were attacked by the evil goblins-as I was about to
tell you.” “Go on telling, then!” said Beorn, who was never very polite. “There was a terrible storm;
the stone-giants were out hurling rocks, and at the head of the pass we took refuge in a cave, the hob
bit and I and several of our companions...”
“Do you call two several?”
“Well, no. As a matter of fact there were more than two.”
“Where are they? Killed, eaten, gone home?”
“Well, no. They don’t seem all to have come when I whistled. Shy, I expect. You see, we are
very much afraid that we are rather a lot for you to entertain.”
“Go on, whistle again! I am in for a party, it seems, and one or two more won’t make much
difference,” growled Beorn.
Gandalf whistled again; but Nori and Ori were there almost before he had stopped, for, if you
remember, Gandalf had told them to come in pairs every five minutes.
“Hullo!” said Beorn. “You came pretty quick-where were you hiding? Come on my
jack-in-the-boxes!”
“Nori at your service, Ori at...” they began; but Beorn interrupted them.
“Thank you! When I want your help I will ask for it. Sit down, and let’s get on with this tale,
or it will be supper-time before it is ended.” “As soon as we were asleep,” went on Gandalf, “a
crack at the back of the cave opened; goblins came out and grabbed the hobbit and the dwarves and
our troop of ponies-“ “Troop of ponies? What were you-a travelling circus? Or were you carrying
lots of goods? Or do you always call six a troop?”
“O no! As a matter of fact there were more than six ponies, for there were more than six of
us-and well, here are two more!” Just at that moment Balin and Dwalin appeared and bowed so low
that their beards swept the stone floor. The big man was frowning at first, but they did their very
best to be frightfully polite, and kept on nodding and bending and bowing and waving their hoods
before their knees (in proper dwarf-fashion), till he stopped frowning and burst into a chuckling
laugh; they looked so comical. “Troop, was right,” he said. “A fine comic one. Come in my merry
men, and what are your names? I don’t want your service just now, only your names; and then sitdown and stop wagging!”
“Balin and Dwalin,” they said not daring to be offended, and sat flop on the floor looking
rather surprised.
“Now go on again!” said Beorn to the wizard.
“Where was  ? O yes– I was not grabbed. I killed a goblin or two with a flash-“ “Good!”
growled Beorn. “It is some good being a wizard, then.” “-and slipped inside the crack before it
closed. I followed down into the main hall, which was crowded with goblins. The Great Goblin was
there with thirty or forty armed guards. I thought to myself ‘even if they were not all chained
together, what can a dozen do against so many?’ “ “A dozen! That’s the first time I’ve heard eight
called a dozen. Or have you still got some more jacks that haven’t yet come out of their boxes?”
“Well, yes, there seem to be a couple more here now – Fili and Kili, I believe,” said Gandalf, as
these two now appeared and stood smiling and bowing.
“That’s enough!” said Beorn. “Sit down and be quiet! Now go on, Gandalf!” So Gandalf went
on with the tale, until he came to the fight in the dark, the discovery of the lower gate, and their
horror when they found that Mr. Baggins had been mislaid.
“We counted ourselves and found that there was no hobbit. There were only fourteen of us
left!”
“Fourteen! That’s the first time I’ve heard one from ten leave fourteen.
You mean nine, or else you haven’t told me yet all the names of your party.” “Well, of course
you haven’t seen Oin and Gloin yet. And, bless me! here they are. I hope you will forgive them for
bothering you.” “O let ‘em all come! Hurry up! Come along, you two, and sit down! But look here,
Gandalf, even now we have only got yourself and ten dwarves and the hobbit that was lost. That
only makes eleven (plus one mislaid) and not fourteen, unless wizards count differently to other
people. But now please get on with the tale.” Beorn did not show it more than he could help, but
really he had begun to get very interested. You see, in the old days he had known the very part of
the mountains that Gandalf was describing. He nodded and he growled, when he heard of the
hobbit’s reappearance and of their scramble down the stone-slide and of the wolf-ring m the woods.
When Gandalf came to their climbing into trees with the wolves all underneath, he got up and
strode about and muttered:
“I wish I had been there! I would have given them more than fireworks!” “Well,” said
Gandalf very glad to see that his tale was making a good impression, “I did the best I could. There
we were with the wolves going mad underneath us and the forest beginning to blaze in places, when
the goblins came down from the hills and discovered us. They yelled with delight and sang songs
making fun of us. Fifteen birds in five fir-trees...” “Good heavens!” growled Beorn. “Don’t pretend
that goblins can’t count.
They can. Twelve isn’t fifteen and they know it.”
“And so do  . There were Bifur and Bofur as well. I haven’t ventured to introduce them
before, but here they are.”
In came Bifur and Bofur. “And me!” gasped Bombur pulling up behind. He was fat, and also
angry at being left till last. He refused to wait five minutes, and followed immediately after the
other two. “Well, now there are fifteen of you; and since goblins can count, I suppose that is all that
there were up the trees. Now perhaps we can finish this story without any more interruptions.” Mr.
Baggins saw then how clever Gandalf had been. The interruptions had really made Beorn more
interested in the story, and the story had kept him from sending the dwarves off at once like
suspicious beggars. He never invited people into his house, if he could help it. He had very few
friends and they lived a good way away; and he never invited more than a couple of these to his
house at a time. Now he had got fifteen strangers sitting in his porch!
By the time the wizard had finished his tale and had told of the eagles’ rescue and of how they
had all been brought to the Carrock, the sun had fallen behind the peaks of the Misty Mountains and
the shadows were long in Beorn’s garden.
“A very good tale!” said he. “The best I have heard for a long while. If all beggars could tell
such a good one, they might find me kinder. You may be making it all up, of course, but youdeserve a supper for the story all the same. Let’s have something to eat!”
“Yes, please!” they all said together. “Thank you very much!” Inside the hall it was now quite
dark. Beorn clapped his hands, and in trotted four beautiful white ponies and several large
long-bodied grey dogs. Beorn said something to them in a queer language like animal noises turned
into talk. They went out again and soon came back carrying torches in their mouths, which they lit
at the fire and stuck in low brackets on the pillars of the hall about the central hearth.
The dogs could stand on their hind-legs when they wished, and carry things with their
fore-feet. Quickly they got out boards and trestles from the side walls and set them up near the fire.
Then baa-baa-baa! was heard, and in came some snow-white sheep led by a large coal-black
ram. One bore a white cloth embroidered at the edges with figures of animals; others bore on their
broad backs trays with bowls and platters and knives and wooden spoons, which the dogs took and
quickly laid on the trestle tables. These were very low, low enough even for Bilbo to sit at
comfortably. Beside them a pony pushed two low-seated benches with wide rush-bottoms and little
short thick legs for Gandalf and Thorin, while at the far end he put Beorn’s big black chair of the
same sort (in which he sat with his great legs stuck far out under the table). These were all the chairs
he had in his hall, and he probably had them low like the tables for the convenience of the
wonderful animals that waited on him. What did the rest sit on? They were not forgotten. The other
ponies came in rolling round drum-shaped sections of logs, smoothed and polished, and low enough
even for Bilbo; so soon they were all seated at Beorn’s table, and the hall had not seen such a
gathering for many a year.
There they had a supper, or a dinner, such as they had not had since they left the Last Homely
House in the West and said good-bye to Elrond. The light of the torches and the fire flickered about
them, and on the table were two tall red beeswax candles. All the time they ate, Beorn in his deep
rolling voice told tales of the wild lands on this side of the mountains, and especially of the dark and
dangerous wood, that lay outstretched far to North and South a day’s ride before them, barring their
way to the East, the terrible forest of Mirkwood.
The dwarves listened and shook their beards, for they knew that they must soon venture into
that forest and that after the mountains it was the worst of the perils they had to pass before they
came to the dragon’s stronghold. When dinner was over they began to tell tales of their own, but
Beorn seemed to be growing drowsy and paid little heed to them. They spoke most of gold and
silver and jewels and the making of things by smith-craft, and Beorn did not appear to care for such
things: there were no things of gold or silver in his hall, and few save the knives were made of
metal at all. They sat long at the table with their wooden drinking-bowls filled with mead. The dark
night came on outside. The fires in the middle of the hall were built with fresh logs and the torches
were put out, and still they sat in the light of the dancing flames with the pillars of the house
standing tall behind them, arid dark at the top like trees of the forest. Whether it was magic or not, it
seemed to Bilbo that he heard a sound like wind in the branches stirring in the rafters, and the hoot
of owls. Soon he began to nod with sleep and the voices seemed to grow far away, until he woke
with a start. The great door had creaked and slammed. Beorn was gone. The dwarves were sitting
cross-legged on the floor round the fire, and presently they began to sing. Some of the verses were
like this, but there were many more, and their singing went on for a long while:
“The wind was on the withered heath,
but in the forest stirred no leaf:
there shadows lay by night and day,
and dark things silent crept beneath.
The wind came down from mountains cold,
and like a tide it roared and rolled;
the branches groaned, the forest moaned,
and leaves were laid upon the mould.
The wind went on from West to East ;
all movement in the forest ceased,
but shrill and harsh across the marshits whistling voices were released.
The grasses hissed, their tassels bent,
the reeds were rattling-on it went
o’ er shaken pool under heavens cool
where racing clouds were torn and rent.
It passed the lonely Mountain bare
and swept above the dragon’s lair :
there black and dark lay boulders stark
and flying smoke was in the air.
It left the world and took its flight
over the wide seas of the night.
The moon set sail upon the gale,
and stars were fanned to leaping light.”
Bilbo began to nod again. Suddenly up stood Gandalf. “It is time for us to sleep,” be said,
“-for us, but not I think for Beorn. In this hall we can rest sound and safe, but I warn you all not to
forget what Beorn said before he left us: you must not stray outside until the sun is up, on your
peril.” Bilbo found that beds had already been laid at the side of the hall, on a sort of raised platform
between the pillars and the outer wall. For him there was a little mattress of straw and woollen
blankets. He snuggled into them very gladly, summertime though it was. The fire burned low and he
fell asleep. Yet in the night he woke: the fire had now sunk to a few embers; the dwarves and
Gandalf were all asleep, to judge by their breathing; a splash of white on the floor came from the
high moon, which was peering down through the smoke-hole in the roof.
There was a growling sound outside, and a noise as of some great animal scuffling at the door.
Bilbo.wondered what it was, and whether it could be Beorn in enchanted shape, and if he would
come in as a bear and kill them. He dived under the blankets and hid his head, and fell asleep again
at last in spite of his fears.
It was full morning when he awoke. One of the dwarves had fallen over him in the shadows
where he lay, and had rolled down with a bump from the platform on to the floor. It was Bofur, and
he was grumbling about it, when Bilbo opened his eyes.
“Get up lazybones,” he said, “or there will be no breakfast left for you.”
Up jumped Bilbo. “Breakfast!” he cried. “Where is breakfast?” “Mostly inside us,” answered
the other dwarves who were moving around the hall; “but what is left is out on the veranda. We
have been about looking for Beorn ever since the sun got up; but there is no sign of him anywhere,
though we found breakfast laid as soon as we went out.”
“Where is Gandalf?” asked Bilbo, moving off to find something to eat as quick as he could.
“O! out and about somewhere,” they told him. But he saw no sign of the wizard all that day
until the evening. Just before sunset he walked into the hall, where the hobbit and the dwarves were
having supper, waited on by Beorn’s wonderful animals, as they had been all day. Of Beorn they
had seen and heard nothing since the night before, and they were getting puzzled. “Where is our
host, and where have you been all day yourself?” they all cried.
“One question at a time-and none till after supper! I haven’t had a bite since breakfast.”
At last Gandalf pushed away his plate and jug – he had eaten two whole loaves (with masses
of butter and honey and clotted cream) and drunk at least a quart of mead and he took out his pipe.
“I will answer the second question first,” he said, “-but bless me! this is a splendid place for smoke
rings!” Indeed for a long time they could get nothing more out of him, he was so busy sending
smoke-rings dodging round the pillars of the hall, changing them into all sorts of different shapes
and colours, and setting them at last chasing one another out of the hole in the roof.
They must have looked very queer from outside, popping out into the air one after another,
green, blue, red, silver-grey, yellow, white; big ones, little ones; little ones dodging through big ones
and joining into figure-eights, and going off like a flock of birds into the distance. “I have been
picking out bear-tracks,” he said at last. “There must have been a regular bears’ meeting outside
here last night. I soon saw that Beorn could not have made them all: there were far too many ofthem, and they were of various sizes too. I should say there were little bears, large bears, ordinary
bears, and gigantic big bears, all dancing outside from dark to nearly dawn. They came from almost
every direction, except from the west over the river, from the Mountains. In that direction only one
set of footprints led-none coming, only ones going away from here.
I followed these as far as the Carrock. There they disappeared into the river, but the water was
too deep and strong beyond the rock for me to cross. It is easy enough, as you remember, to get
from this bank to the Carrock by the ford, but on the other side is a cliff standing up from a swirling
channel. I had to walk miles before I found a place where the river was wide and shallow enough
for me to wade and swim, and then miles back again to pick up the tracks again. By that time it was
too late for me to follow them far. They went straight off in the direction of the pine-woods on the
east side of the Misty Mountains, where we had our pleasant little party with the Wargs the night
before last. And now I think I have answered your first question, too,” ended Gandalf, and he sat a
long while silent.
Bilbo thought he knew what the wizard meant. “What shall we do,” he cried, “if he leads all
the Wargs and the goblins down here? We shall all be caught and killed! I thought you said he was
not   friend of theirs.” “So I did. And don’t be silly! You had better go to bed, your wits are sleepy.”
The hobbit felt quite crushed, and as there seemed nothing else to do he did go to bed; and
while the dwarves were still singing songs he dropped asleep, still puzzling his little head about
Beorn, till he dreamed a dream of hundreds of black bears dancing slow heavy dances round and
round in the moonlight in the courtyard. Then he woke up when everyone else was asleep, and he
heard the same scraping, scuffling, snuffling, and growling as before. Next morning they were all
wakened by Beorn himself.
“So here you all are still!” he said. He picked up the hobbit and laughed: “Not eaten up by
Wargs or goblins or wicked bears yet I see”; and he poked Mr. Baggins’ waistcoat most
disrespectfully. “Little bunny is getting nice and fat again on bread and honey,” he chuckled. “Come
and have some more!”
So they all went to breakfast with him. Beorn was most jolly for a change; indeed he seemed
to be in a splendidly good humour and set them all laughing with his funny stories; nor did they
have to wonder long where he had been or why he was so nice to them, for he told them himself. He
had been over the river and right back up into the mountains-from which you can guess that he
could travel quickly, in bear’s shape at any rate. From the burnt wolf– glade he had soon found out
that part of their story was true; but he had found more than that: he had caught a Warg and a goblin
wandering in the woods. From these he had got news: the goblin patrols were still hunting with
Wargs for the dwarves, and they were fiercely angry because of the death of the Great Goblin, and
also because of the burning of the chief wolf’s nose and the death from the wizard’s fire of many of
his chief servants. So much they told him when he forced them, but he guessed there was more
wickedness than this afoot, and that a great raid of the whole goblin army with their wolf-allies into
the lands shadowed by the mountains might soon be made to find the dwarves, or to take vengeance
on the men and creatures that lived there, and who they thought must be sheltering them.
“It was a good story, that of yours,” said Beorn, “but I like it still better now I am sure it is
true. You must forgive my not taking your word. If you lived near the edge of Mirkwood, you
would take the word of no one that you did not know as well as your brother or better. As it is, I can
only say that I have hurried home as fast as I could to see that you were safe, and to offer you any
help that I can. I shall think more kindly of dwarves after this. Killed the Great Goblin, killed the
Great Goblin!” he chuckled fiercely to himself.
“What did you do with the goblin and the Warg?” asked Bilbo suddenly. “Come and see!”
said Beorn, and they followed round the house. A goblin’s head was stuck outside the gate and a
warg-skin was nailed to a tree just beyond. Beorn was a fierce enemy. But now he was their friend,
and Gandalf thought it wise to tell him their whole story and the reason of their journey, so that they
could get the most help he could offer.
This is what he promised to do for them. He would provide ponies for each of them, and a
horse for Gandalf, for their journey to the forest, and he would lade them with food to last them forweeks with care, and packed so as to be as easy as possible to carry-nuts, flour, sealed jars of dried
fruits, and red earthenware pots of honey, and twice-baked cakes that would keep good a long time,
and on a little of which they could march far. The making of these was one of his secrets; but honey
was in them, as in most of his foods, and they were good to eat, though they made one thirsty.
Water, he said, they would not need to carry this side of the forest, for there were streams and
springs along the road. “But your way through Mirkwood is dark, dangerous and difficult,” he said.
“Water is not easy to find there, nor food. The time is not yet come for nuts (though it may be past
and gone indeed before you get to the other side), and nuts are about all that grows there fit for
food; in there the wild things are dark, queer, and savage. I will provide you with skins for carrying
water, and I will give you some bows and arrows. But I doubt very much whether anything you find
in Mirkwood will be wholesome to eat or to drink. There is one stream there, I know, black and
strong which crosses the path. That you should neither drink of, nor bathe in; for I have heard that it
carries enchantment and a great drowsiness and forgetfulness. And in the dim shadows of that place
I don’t think you will shoot anything, wholesome or unwholesome, without straying from the path.
That you MUST NOT do, for any reason. “That is all the advice I can give you. Beyond the edge of
the forest I cannot help you much; you must depend on your luck and your courage and the food I
send with you. At the gate of the forest I must ask you to send back my horse and my ponies. But I
wish you all speed, and my house is open to you, if ever you come back this way again.”
They thanked him, of course, with many bows and sweepings of their hoods and with many
an “at your service, O master of the wide wooden halls!” But their spirits sank at his grave words,
and they all felt that the adventure was far more dangerous than they had thought, while all the time,
even if they passed all the perils of the road, the dragon was waiting at the end. All that morning
they were busy with preparations. Soon after midday they ate with Beorn for the last time, and after
the meal they mounted the steeds he was lending them, and bidding him many farewells they rode
off through his gate at a good pace.
As soon as they left his high hedges at the east of his fenced lands they
turned north and then bore to the north-west. By his advice they were no
longer making for the main forest-road to the south of his land. Had they
followed the pass, their path would have led them down the stream from the mountains that
joined the great river miles south of the Carrock. At that point there was a deep ford which they
might have passed, if they had still had their ponies, and beyond that a track led to the skirts of the
wood and to the entrance of the old forest road. But Beorn had warned them that that way was now
often used by the goblins, while the forest-road itself, he bad heard, was overgrown and disused at
the eastern end and led to impassable marshes where the paths had long been lost. Its eastern
opening had also always been far to the south of the Lonely Mountain, and would have left them
still with a long and difficult northward march when they got to the other side. North of the Carrock
the edge of Mirkwood drew closer to the borders of the Great River, and though here the Mountains
too drew down nearer, Beorn advised them to take this way; for at a place a few days’ ride due north
of the Carrock was the gate of a little-known pathway through Mirkwood that led almost straight
towards the Lonely Mountain.
“The goblins,” Beorn had said, “will not dare to cross the Great River for a hundred miles
north of the Carrock nor to come near my house – it is well protected at night!– but I should ride
fast; for if they make their raid soon they will cross the river to the south and scour all the edge of
the forest so as to cut you off, and Wargs run swifter than ponies. Still you are safer going north,
even though you seem to be going back nearer to their strongholds; for that is what they will least
expect, and they will have the longer ride to catch you. Be off now as quick as you may!” That is
why they were now riding in silence, galloping wherever the ground was grassy and smooth, with
the mountains dark on their left, and in the distance the line of the river with its trees drawing ever
closer. The sun had only just turned west when they started, and till evening it lay golden on the
land about them. It was difficult to think of pursuing goblins behind, and when they had put many
miles between them and Beorn’s house they began to talk and to sing again and to forget the dark
forest-path that lay in front. But in the evening when the dusk came on and the peaks of themountains glowered against the sunset they made a camp and set a guard, and most of them slept
uneasily with dreams in which there came the howl of hunting wolves and the cries of goblins. Still
the next morning dawned bright and fair again. There was an autumn-like mist white upon the
ground and the air was chill, but soon the sun rose red in the East and the mists vanished, and while
the shadows were still long they were off again. So they rode now for two more days, and all the
while they saw nothing save grass and flowers and birds and scattered trees, and occasionally small
herds of red deer browsing or sitting at noon in the shade. Sometimes Bilbo saw the horns of the
harts sticking up out of the long grass, and at first he thought they were the dead branches of trees.
That third evening they were so eager to press on, for Beorn had said that they should reach the
forest-gate early on the fourth day, that they rode still forward after dusk and into the night beneath
the moon. As the light faded Bilbo thought he saw away to the right, or to the left, the shadowy
form of a great bear prowling along in the same direction. But if he dared to mention it to Gandalf,
the wizard only said: “Hush! Take no notice!” Next day they started before dawn, though their night
had been short. As soon as it was light they could see the forest coming as it were to meet them, or
waiting for them like a black and frowning wall before them. The land began to slope up and up,
and it seemed to the hobbit that a silence began to draw in upon them. Birds began to sing less.
There were no more deer; not even rabbits were to be seen. By the afternoon they had reached the
eaves of Mirkwood, and were resting almost beneath the great overhanging boughs of its outer
trees. Their trunks were huge and gnarled, their branches twisted, their leaves were dark and long.
Ivy grew on them and trailed along the ground. “Well, here is Mirkwood!” said Gandalf. “The
greatest of the forests of the Northern world. I hope you like the look of it. Now you must send back
these excellent ponies you have borrowed.”
The dwarves were inclined to grumble at this, but the wizard told them they were fools.
“Beorn is not as far off as you seem to think, and you had better keep your promises anyway, for he
is a bad enemy. Mr. Baggins’ eyes are sharper than yours, if you have not seen each night after dark
a great bear going along with us or sitting far of in the moon watching our camps. Not only to guard
you and guide you, but to keep an eye on the ponies too. Beorn may be your friend, but he loves his
animals as his children. You do not guess what kindness he has shown you in letting dwarves ride
them so far and so fast, nor what would happen to you, if you tried to take them into the forest.”
“What about the horse, then?” said Thorin. “You don’t mention sending that back.”
“I don’t, because I am not sending it.”
“What about your promise then?”
“I will look after that. I am not sending the horse back, I am riding it!”
Then they knew that Gandalf was going to leave them at the very edge of Mirkwood, and they
were in despair.
But nothing they could say would change his mind.
“Now we had this all out before, when we landed on the Carrock,” he said. “It is no use
arguing. I have, as I told you, some pressing business away south; and I am already late through
bothering with you people. We may meet again before all is over, and then again of course we may
not. That depends on your luck and on your courage and sense; and I am sending Mr. Baggins with
you. I have told you before that he has more about him than you guess, and you will find that out
before long. So cheer up Bilbo and don’t look so glum. Cheer up Thorin and Company! This is your
expedition after all. Think of the treasure at the end, and forget the forest and the dragon, at any rate
until tomorrow morning!”
When tomorrow morning came he still said the same. So now there was nothing left to do but
to fill their water-skins at a clear spring they found close to the forest-gate, and unpack the ponies.
They distributed the packages as fairly as they could, though Bilbo thought his lot was wearisomely
heavy, and did not at all like the idea of trudging for miles and miles with all that on his back.
“Don’t you worry!” said Thorin. “It will get lighter all too soon. Before long I expect we shall
all wish our packs heavier, when the food begins to run short.”
Then at last they said good-bye to their ponies and turned their heads for home. Off they
trotted gaily, seeming very glad to put their tails towards the shadow of Mirkwood. As they wentaway Bilbo could have sworn that a thing like a bear left the shadow of the trees and shambled off
quickly after them. Now Gandalf too said farewell. Bilbo sat on the ground feeling very unhappy
and wishing he was beside the wizard on his tall horse. He had gone just inside the forest after
breakfast (a very poor one), and it had seemed as dark in there in the morning as at night, and very
secret: “a sort of watching and waiting feeling,” he said to himself.
“Good-bye!” said Gandalf to Thorin. “And good-bye to you all, good-bye! Straight through
the forest is your way now. Don’t stray off the track!-if you do, it is a thousand to one you will
never find it again and never get out of Mirkwood; and then I don’t suppose I, or any one else, will
ever see you again.”
“Do we really have to go through?” groaned the hobbit.
“Yes, you do!” said the wizard, “if you want to get to the other side. You must either go
through or give up your quest. And I am not going to allow you to back out now, Mr. Baggins. I am
ashamed of you for thinking of it. You have got to look after all these dwarves for me,” he laughed.
“No! no!” said Bilbo. “I didn’t mean that. I meant, is there no way round?”
“There is, if you care to go two hundred miles or so out of your way north, and twice that
south. But you wouldn’t get a safe path even then. There are no safe paths in this part of the world.
Remember you are over the Edge of the Wild now, and in for all sorts of fun wherever you go.
Before you could get round Mirkwood in the North you would be right among the slopes of the
Grey Mountains, and they are simply stiff with goblins, hobgoblins, and rest of the worst
description. Before you could get round it in the South, you would get into the land of the
Necromancer; and even you. Bilbo, won’t need me to tell you tales of that black sorcerer. I don’t
advise you to go anywhere near the places overlooked by his dark tower! Stick to the forest-track,
keep your spirits up, hope for the best, and with a tremendous slice of luck you may come out one
day and see the Long Marshes lying below you, and beyond them, high in the East, the Lonely
Mountain where dear old Smaug lives, though I hope he is not expecting you.”
“Very comforting you are to be sure,” growled Thorin. “Good-bye! If you won’t come with
us, you had better get off without any more talk!” “Good-bye then, and really good-bye!” said
Gandalf, and he turned his horse and rode down into the West. But he could not resist the
temptation to have the last word. Before he had passed quite out of hearing he turned and put his
hands to his mouth and called to them. They heard his voice come faintly: “Good-bye! Be good,
take care of yourselves-and DON’T LEAVE THE PATH!”
Then he galloped away and was soon lost to sight. “O good-bye and go away!” grunted the
dwarves, all the more angry because they were really filled with dismay at losing him. Now began
the most dangerous part of all the journey.
They each shouldered the heavy pack and the water-skin which was their share, and turned
from the light that lay on the lands outside and plunged into the forest.
Chapter  
Flies and Spiders
They walked in single file. The entrance to the path was like a sort of arch leading into a
gloomy tunnel made by two great trees that leant together, too old and strangled with ivy and hung
with lichen to bear more than a few blackened leaves. The path itself was narrow and wound in and
out among the trunks. Soon the light at the gate was like a little bright hole far behind, and the quiet
was so deep that their feet seemed to thump along while all the trees leaned over them and listened.
As theft eyes became used to the dimness they could see a little way to either side in a sort of
darkened green glimmer. Occasionally a slender beam of sun that had the luck to slip in through
some opening in the leaves far above, and still more luck in not being caught in the tangled boughs
and matted twigs beneath, stabbed down thin and bright before them. But this was seldom, and it
soon ceased altogether. There were black squirrels in the wood. As Bilbo’s sharp inquisitive eyes
got used to seeing things he could catch glimpses of them whisking off the path and scuttling
behind tree-trunks. There were queer noises too, grunts, scufflings, and hurryings in theundergrowth, and among the leaves that lay piled endlessly thick in places on the forest-floor; but
what made the noises he could not see. The nastiest things they saw were the cobwebs: dark dense
cobwebs with threads extraordinarily thick, often stretched from tree to tree, or tangled in the lower
branches on either side of them. There were none stretched across the path, but whether because
some magic kept it clear, or for what other reason they could not guess.
It was not long before they grew to hate the forest as heartily as they had hated the tunnels of
the goblins, and it seemed to offer even less hope of any ending. But they had to go on and on, long
after they were sick for a sight of the sun and of the sky, and longed for the feel of wind on their
faces. There was no movement of air down under the forest-roof, and it was everlastingly still and
dark and stuffy. Even the dwarves felt it, who were used to tunnelling, and lived at times for long
whiles without the light of the sun; but the hobbit, who liked holes to make a house in but not to
spend summer days in, felt he was being slowly suffocated. The nights were the worst. It then
became pitch-dark – not what you call pitch-dark, but really pitch; so black that you really could see
nothing. Bilbo tried flapping his hand in front of his nose, but he could not see it at all. Well,
perhaps it is not true to say that they could see nothing: they could see eyes. They slept all closely
huddled together, and took it in turns to watch; and when it was Bilbo’s turn he would see gleams in
the darkness round them, and sometimes pairs of yellow or red or green eyes would stare at him
from a little distance, and then slowly fade and disappear and slowly shine out again in another
place. And sometimes they would gleam down from the branches just above him; and that was most
terrifying. But the eyes that he liked the least were horrible pale bulbous sort of eyes. “Insect eyes”
he thought, “not animal eyes, only they are much too big.” Although it was not yet very cold, they
tried lighting watch-fires at night, but they soon gave that up. It seemed to bring hundreds and
hundreds of eyes all round them, though the creatures, whatever they were, were careful never to let
their bodies show in the little flicker of the flames. Worse still it brought thousands of dark-grey and
black moths, some nearly as big as your hand, flapping and whirring round their ears. They could
not stand that, nor the huge bats, black as a top-hat, either; so they gave up fires and sat at night and
dozed in the enormous uncanny darkness. All this went on for what seemed to the hobbit ages upon
ages; and he was always hungry, for they were extremely careful with their provisions. Even so, as
days followed days, and still the forest seemed just the same, they began to get anxious. The food
would not last for ever: it was in fact already beginning to get low. They tried shooting at the
squirrels, and they wasted many arrows before they managed to bring one down on the path. But
when they roasted it, it proved horrible to taste, and they shot no more squirrels. They were thirsty
too, for they had none too much water, and in all the time they had seen neither spring nor stream.
This was their state when one day they found their path blocked by a running water. It flowed fast
and strong but not very wide right across the way, and it was black, or looked it in the gloom. It was
well that Beorn had warned them against it, or they would have drunk from it, whatever its colour,
and filled some of their emptied skins at its bank. As it was they only thought of how to cross it
without wetting themselves in its water. There had been a bridge of wood across, but it had rotted
and fallen leaving only the broken posts near the bank. Bilbo kneeling on the brink and peering
forward cried: “There is a boat against the far bank! Now why couldn’t it have been this side!”
“How far away do you think it is?” asked Thorin, for by now they knew Bilbo had the sharpest eyes
among them.
“Not at all far. I shouldn’t think above twelve yards.”
“Twelve yards! I should have thought it was thirty at least, but my eyes don’t see as well as
they used a hundred years ago. Still twelve yards is as good as a mile. We can’t jump it, and we
daren’t try to wade or swim.” “Can any of you throw a rope?”
“What’s the good of that? The boat is sure to be tied up, even if we could hook it, which I
doubt.”
“I don’t believe it is tied,” said Bilbo, “though of course I can’t be sure in this light; but it
looks to me as if it was just drawn up on the bank, which is low just there where the path goes down
into the water.” “Dori is the strongest, but Fili is the youngest and still has the best sight,” said
Thorin. “Come here Fili, and see if you can see the boat Mr. Baggins is talking about.”Fili thought he could; so when he had stared a long while to get an idea of the direction, the
others brought him a rope. They had several with them, and on the end of the longest they fastened
one of the large iron hooks they had used for catching their packs to the straps about their shoulders.
Fili took this in his hand, balanced it for a moment, and then flung it across the stream.
Splash it fell in the water! “Not far enough!” said Bilbo who was peering forward. “A couple
of feet and you would have dropped it on to the boat. Try again. I don’t suppose the magic is strong
enough to hurt you, if you just touch a bit of wet rope.”
Fili picked up the hook when he had drawn it back, rather doubtfully all the same. This time
he threw it with greater strength. “Steady!” said Bilbo, “you have thrown it right into the wood on
the other side now. Draw it back gently.” Fili hauled the rope back slowly, and after a while Bilbo
said:
“Carefully! It is lying on the boat; let’s hope the hook will catch.” It did. The rope went taut,
and Fili pulled in vain. Kili came to his help, and then Oin and Gloin. They tugged and tugged, and
suddenly they all fell over on their backs. Bilbo was on the lockout, however, caught the rope, and
with a piece of stick fended off the little black boat as it came rushing across the stream. “Help!” he
shouted, and Balin was just in time to seize the boat before it floated off down the current.
“It was tied after all,” said he, looking at the snapped painter that was still dangling from it.
“That was a good pull, my lads; and a good job that our rope was the stronger.”
“Who’ll cross first?” asked Bilbo.
“I shall,” said Thorin, “and you will come with me, and Fili and Balin. That’s as many as the
boat will hold at a time. After that Kili and Oin and Gloin and Don; next On and Nori, Bifur and
Bofur; and last Dwalin and Bombur.” “I’m always last and I don’t like it,” said Bombur. “It’s
somebody else’s turn today.”
“You should not be so fat. As you are, you must be with the last and lightest boatload. Don’t
start grumbling against orders, or something bad will happen to you.”
“There aren’t any oars. How are you going to push the boat back to the far bank?” asked the
hobbit.
“Give me another length of rope and another hook,” said Fili, and when they had got it ready,
he cast into the darkness ahead and as high as he could throw it. Since it did not fall down again,
they saw that it must have stuck in the branches. “Get in now,” said Fili, “and one of you haul on
the rope that is stuck in a tree on the other side. One of the others must keep hold of the hook we
used at first, and when we are safe on the other side he can hook it on, and you can draw the boat
back.”
In this way they were all soon on the far bank safe across the enchanted stream. Dwalin had
just scrambled out with the coiled rope on his arm, and Bombur (still grumbling) was getting ready
to follow, when something bad did happen. There was a flying sound of hooves on the path ahead.
Out of the gloom came suddenly the shape of a flying deer. It charged into the dwarves and bowled
them over, then gathered itself for a leap. High it sprang and cleared the water with a mighty jump.
But it did not reach the other side in safety. Thorin was the only one who had kept his feet and his
wits. As soon as they had landed he had bent his bow and fitted an arrow in case any hidden
guardian of the boat appeared. Now he sent a swift and sure shot into the leaping beast. As it
reached the further bank it stumbled. The shadows swallowed it up, but they heard the sound of
hooves quickly falter and then go still. Before they could shout in praise of the shot, however, a
dreadful wail from Bilbo put all thoughts of venison out of their minds. “Bombur has fallen in!
Bombur is drowning!” he cried. It was only too true. Bombur had only one foot on the land when
the hart bore down on him, and sprang over him. He had stumbled, thrusting the boat away from the
bank, and then toppled back into the dark water, his hands slipping off the slimy roots at the edge,
while the boat span slowly off and disappeared.
They could still see his hood above the water when they ran to the bank.
Quickly they flung a rope with a hook towards him. His hand caught it, and hey pulled him to
the shore. He was drenched from hair to boots, of course, but that was not the worst. When they laid
him on the bank he was already fast asleep, with one hand clutching the rope so tight that they couldnot get it from his grasp; and fast asleep he remained in spite of all they could do. They were still
standing over him, cursing their ill luck, and Bombur’s clumsiness, and lamenting the loss of the
boat which made it impossible for them to go back and look for the hart, when they became aware
of the dim blowing of horns in the wood and the sound as of dogs baying far off. Then they all fell
silent; and as they sat it seemed they could hear the noise of a great hunt going by to the north of the
path, though they saw no sign of it. There they sat for a long while and did not dare to make a
move. Bombur slept on with a smile on his fat face, as if he no longer cared for all the troubles that
vexed them.
Suddenly on the path ahead appeared some white deer, a hind and fawns as snowy white as
the hart had been dark. They glimmered in the shadows. Before Thorin could cry out three of the
dwarves had leaped to their feet and loosed off arrows from their bows. None seemed to find their
mark. The deer turned and vanished in the trees as silently as they had come, and in vain the
dwarves shot their arrows after them.
“Stop! stop!” shouted Thorin; but it was too late, the excited dwarves had wasted their last
arrows, and now the bows that Beorn had given them were useless.
They were a gloomy party that night, and the gloom gathered still deeper on them in the
following days. They had crossed the enchanted stream; but beyond it the path seemed to straggle
on just as before, and in the forest they could see no change. Yet if they had known more about it
and considered the meaning of the hunt and the white deer that had appeared upon their path, they
would have known that they were at last drawing towards the eastern edge, and would soon have
come, if they could have kept up their courage and their hope, to thinner trees and places where the
sunlight came again. But they did not know this, and they were burdened with the heavy body of
Bombur, which they had to carry along with them as best they could, taking the wearisome task in
turns of four each while the others shared their packs. If these had not become all too light in the
last few days, they would never have managed it; but a slumbering and smiling Bombur was a poor
exchange for packs filled with food however heavy. In a few days a time came when there was
practically nothing left to eat or to drink. Nothing wholesome could they see growing in the woods,
only funguses and herbs with pale leaves and unpleasant smell.
About four days from the enchanted stream they came to a part where most of the trees were
beeches. They were at first inclined to be cheered by the change, for here there was no undergrowth
and the shadow was not so deep. There was a greenish light about them, and in places they could
see some distance to either side of the path. Yet the light only showed them endless lines of straight
grey trunks like the pillars of some huge twilight hall. There was a breath of air and a noise of wind,
but it had a sad sound. A few leaves came rustling down to remind them that outside autumn was
coming on. Their feet ruffled among the dead leaves of countless other autumns that drifted over the
banks of the path from the deep red carpets of the forest. Still Bombur slept and they grew very
weary. At times they heard disquieting laughter. Sometimes there was singing in the distance too.
The laughter was the laughter of fair voices not of goblins, and the singing was beautiful, but it
sounded eerie and strange, and they were not comforted, rather they hurried on from those parts
with what strength they had left. Two days later they found their path going downwards and before
long they were in a valley filled almost entirely with a mighty growth of oaks. “Is there no end to
this accursed forest?” said Thorin. “Somebody must climb a tree and see if he can get his head
above the roof and have a look round. The only way is to choose the tallest tree that overhangs the
path.”
Of course “somebody” meant Bilbo. They chose him because to be of any use the climber
must get his head above the topmost leaves, and so he must be light enough for the highest and
slenderest branches to bear him. Poor Mr. Baggins had never had much practice in climbing trees,
but they hoisted him up into the lowest branches of an enormous oak that grew right out into the
path, and up he had to go as best he could. He pushed his way through the tangled twigs with many
a slap in the eye; he was greened and grimed from the old bark of the greater boughs; more than
once he slipped and caught himself just in time; and at last, after a dreadful struggle in a difficult
place where there seemed to be no convenient branches at all, he got near the top. All the time hewas wondering whether there were spiders in the tree, and how he was going to get down again
(except by falling).
In the end he poked his head above the roof of leaves, and then he found spiders all right. But
they were only small ones of ordinary size, and they were after the butterflies. Bilbo’s eyes were
nearly blinded by the light. He could hear the dwarves shouting up at him from far below, but he
could not answer, only hold on and blink. The sun was shining brilliantly, and it was a long while
before he could bear it. When he could, he saw all round him a sea of dark green, ruffled here and
there by the breeze; and there were everywhere hundreds of butterflies. I expect they were a kind of
‘purple emperor,’ a butterfly that loves the tops of oak-woods, but these were not purple at all, they
were a dark dark velvety black without any markings to be seen. He looked at the ‘black emperors’
for a long time, and enjoyed the feel of the breeze in his hair and on his face; but at length the cries
of the dwarves, who were now simply stamping with impatience down below, reminded him of his
real business. It was no good. Gaze as much as he might, he could see no end to the trees and the
leaves in any direction. His heart, that had been lightened by the sight of the sun and the feel of the
wind, sank back into his toes: there was no food to go back to down below.
Actually, as I have told you, they were not far off the edge of the forest; and if Bilbo had had
the sense to see it, the tree that he had climbed, though it was tall in itself, was standing near the
bottom of a wide valley, so that from its top the trees seemed to swell up all round like the edges of
a great bowl, and he could not expect to see how far the forest lasted. Still he did not see this, and
he climbed down full of despair. He got to the bottom again at last scratched, hot, and miserable,
and he could not see anything in the gloom below when he got there. His report soon made the
others as miserable as he was.
“The forest goes on for ever and ever and ever in all directions! Whatever shall we do? And
what is the use of sending a hobbit!” they cried, as if it was his fault. They did not care tuppence
about the butterflies, and were only made more angry when he told them of the beautiful breeze,
which they were too heavy to climb up and feel.
That night they ate their very last scraps and crumbs of food; and next morning when they
woke the first thing they noticed was that they were still gnawingly hungry, and the next thing was
that it was raining and that here and there the drip of it was dropping heavily on the forest floor.
That only reminded them that they were also parchingly thirsty, without doing anything to relieve
them: you cannot quench a terrible thirst by standing under giant oaks and waiting for a chance drip
to fall on your tongue. The only scrap of comfort there was, came unexpectedly from Bombur. He
woke up suddenly and sat up scratching his head. He could not make out where he was at all, nor
why he felt so hungry; for he had forgotten everything that had happened since they started their
journey that May morning long ago. The last thing that he remembered was the party at the hobbit’s
house, and they had great difficulty in making him believe their tale of all the many adventures they
had had since.
When he heard that there was nothing to eat, he sat down and wept, for he felt very weak and
wobbly in the legs. “Why ever did I wake up!” he cried. “I was having such beautiful dreams. I
dreamed I was walking in a forest rather like this one, only lit with torches on the trees and lamps
swinging from the branches and fires burning on the ground; and there was a great feast going on,
going on for ever. A woodland king was there with a crown of leaves, and there was a merry
singing, and I could not count or describe the things there were to eat and drink.”
“You need not try,” said Thorin. “In fact if you can’t talk about something else, you had better
be silent. We are quite annoyed enough with you as it is. If you hadn’t waked up, we should have
left you to your idiotic dreams in the forest; you are no joke to carry even after weeks of short
commons.”
There was nothing now to be done but to tighten the belts round their empty stomachs, and
hoist their empty sacks and packs, and trudge along the track without any great hope of ever getting
to the end before they lay down and died of starvation. This they did all that day, going very slowly
and wearily, while Bombur kept on wailing that his legs would not carry him and that he wanted to
lie down and sleep.“No you don’t!” they said. “Let your legs take their share, we have carried you far enough.”
All the same he suddenly refused to go a step further and flung himself on the ground. “Go
on, if you must,” he said. “I’m just going to lie here and sleep and dream of food, if I can’t get it
any other way. I hope I never wake up again.”
At that very moment Balin, who was a little way ahead, called out: “What was that? I thought
I saw a twinkle of light in the forest.” They all looked, and a longish way off, it seemed, they saw a
red twinkle in the dark; then another and another sprang out beside it. Even Bombur got up, and
they hurried along then, not caring if it was trolls or goblins. The light was in front of them and to
the left of the path, and when at last they had drawn level with it, it seemed plain that torches and
fires were burning under the trees, but a good way off their track.
“It looks as if my dreams were coming true,” gasped Bombur puffing up behind. He wanted
to rush straight off into the wood after the lights. But the others remembered only too well the
warnings of the wizard and of Beorn. “A feast would be no good, if we never got back alive from
it,” said Thorin. “But without a feast we shan’t remain alive much longer anyway,” said Bombur,
and Bilbo heartily agreed with him. They argued about it backwards and forwards for a long while,
until they agreed at length to send out a couple of spies, to creep near the lights and find out more
about them. But then they could not agree on who was to be sent: no one seemed anxious to run the
chance of being lost and never finding his friends again. In the end, in spite of warnings, hunger
decided them, because Bombur kept on describing all the good things that were being eaten,
according to his dream, in the woodland feast; so they all left the path and plunged into the forest
together. After a good deal of creeping and crawling they peered round the trunks and looked into a
clearing where some trees had been felled and the ground levelled. There were many people there,
elvish-looking folk, all dressed in green and brown and sitting on sawn rings of the felled trees in a
great circle. There was a fire in their midst and there were torches fastened to some of the trees
round about; but most splendid sight of all: they were eating and drinking and laughing merrily.
The smell of the roast meats was so enchanting that, without waiting to consult one another,
every one of them got up and scrambled forwards into the ring with the one idea of begging for
some food. No sooner had the first stepped into the clearing than all the lights went out as if by
magic.
Somebody kicked the fire and it went up in rockets of glittering sparks and vanished. They
were lost in a completely lightless dark and they could not even find one another, not for a long
time at any rate. After blundering frantically in the gloom, falling over logs, bumping crash into
trees, and shouting and calling till they must have waked everything in the forest for miles, at last
they managed to gather themselves in a bundle and count themselves by touch. By that time they
had, of course, quite forgotten in what direction the path lay, and they were all hopelessly lost, at
least till morning.
There was nothing for it but to settle down for the night where they were; they did not even
dare to search on the ground for scraps of food for fear of becoming separated again. But they had
not been lying long, and Bilbo was only just getting drowsy, when Dori, whose turn it was to watch
first, said in a loud whisper:
“The lights are coming out again over there, and there are more than ever of them.”
Up they all jumped. There, sure enough, not far away were scores of twinkling lights, and
they heard the voices and the laughter quite plainly. They crept slowly towards them, in a single
line, each touching the back of the one in front. When they got near Thorin said: “No rushing
forward this time! No one is to stir from hiding till I say. I shall send Mr. Baggins alone first to talk
to them. They won’t be frightened of him-(‘What about me of them?’ thought Bilbo)-and any way I
hope they won’t do anything nasty to him.” When they got to the edge of the circle of lights they
pushed Bilbo suddenly from behind. Before he had time to slip on his ring, he stumbled forward
into the full blaze of the fire and torches. It was no good. Out went all the lights again and complete
darkness fell. If it had been difficult collecting themselves before, it was far worse this time. And
they simply could not find the hobbit. Every time they counted themselves it only made thirteen.
They shouted and called: “Bilbo Baggins! Hobbit! You dratted hobbit! Hi! hobbit, confusticate you,where are you?” and other things of that sort, but there was no answer.
They were just giving up hope, when Dori stumbled across him by sheer luck. In the dark he
fell over what he thought was a log, and he found it was the hobbit curled up fast asleep. It took a
deal of shaking to wake him, and when he was awake he was not pleased at all.
“I was having such a lovely dream,” he grumbled, “all about having a most gorgeous dinner.”
“Good heavens! he has gone like Bombur,” they said. “Don’t tell us about dreams.
Dream-dinners aren’t any good, and we can’t share them.” “They are the best I am likely to get in
this beastly place,” he muttered, as he lay down beside the dwarves and tried to go back to sleep and
find his dream again. But that was not the last of the lights in the forest. Later when the night must
have been getting old, Kili who was watching then, came and roused them all again, saying:
“There’s a regular blaze of light begun not far away – hundreds of torches and many fires
must have been lit suddenly and by magic. And hark to the singing and the harps!”
After lying and listening for a while, they found they could not resist the desire to go nearer
and try once more to get help. Up they got again; and this time the result was disastrous. The feast
that they now saw was greater and more magnificent than before; and at the head of a long line of
feasters sat a woodland king with a crown of leaves upon his golden hair, very much as Bombur had
described the figure in his dream. The elvish folk were passing bowls from hand to hand and across
the fires, and some were harping and many were singing. Their gloaming hair was twined with
flowers; green and white gems glinted on their collars and their belts; and their faces and their songs
were filled with mirth. Loud and clear and fair were those songs, and out stepped Thorin into their
midst.
Dead silence fell in the middle of a word. Out went all light. The fires leaped up in black
smokes. Ashes and cinders were in the eyes of the dwarves, and the wood was filled again with their
clamour and their cries. Bilbo found himself running round and round (as he thought) and calling
and calling:
“Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, Gloin, Fili, Kili, Bombur, Bifur, Bofur, Dwalin, Balin, Thorin
Oakenshield,” while people he could not see or feel were doing the same all round him (with an
occasional “Bilbo!” thrown in). But the cries of the others got steadily further and fainter, and
though after a while it seemed to him they changed to yells and cries for help in the far distance, all
noise at last died right away, and he was left alone in complete silence and darkness. That was one
of his most miserable moments. But he soon made up his mind that it was no good trying to do
anything till day came with some little light, and quite useless to go blundering about tiring himself
out with no hope of any breakfast to revive him. So he sat himself down with his back to a tree, and
not for the last time fell to thinking of his far-distant hobbit-hole with its beautiful pantries. He was
deep in thoughts of bacon and eggs and toast and butter when he felt something touch him.
Something like a strong sticky string was against his left hand, and when he tried to move he found
that his legs were already wrapped in the same stuff, so that when he got up he fell over.
Then the great spider, who had been busy tying him up while he dozed, came from behind
him and came at him. He could only see the things’s eyes, but he could feel its hairy legs as it
struggled to wind its abominable threads round and round him. It was lucky that he had come to his
senses in time. Soon he would not have been able to move at all. As it was, he had a desperate fight
before he got free. He beat the creature off with his hands-it was trying to poison him to keep him
quiet, as small spiders do to flies-until he remembered his sword and drew it out. Then the spider
jumped back, and he had time to cut his legs loose. After that it was his turn to attack. The spider
evidently was not used to things that carried such stings at their sides, or it would have hurried away
quicker. Bilbo came at it before it could disappear and struck it with his sword right in the eyes.
Then it went mad and leaped and danced and flung out its legs in horrible jerks, until he killed it
with another stroke; and then he fell down and remembered nothing more for a long while.
There was the usual dim grey light of the forest-day about him when he came to his senses.
The spider lay dead beside him, and his sword-blade was stained black. Somehow the killing of the
giant spider, all alone by himself in the dark without the help of the wizard or the dwarves or of
anyone else, made a great difference to Mr. Baggins. He felt a different person, and much fiercerand bolder in spite of an empty stomach, as he wiped his sword on the grass and put it back into its
sheath.
“I will give you a name,” he said to it, “and I shall call you Sting.” After that he set out to
explore. The forest was grim and silent, but obviously he had first of all to look for his friends, who
were not likely to be very far off, unless they had been made prisoners by the elves (or worse
things).
Bilbo felt that it was unsafe to shout, and he stood a long while wondering in what direction
the path lay, and in what direction he should go first to look for the dwarves. “O! why did we not
remember Beorn’s advice, and Gandalf’s!” he lamented. “What a mess we are in now! We! I only
wish it was we: it is horrible being all alone.”
In the end he made as good a guess as he could at the direction from which the cries for help
had come in the night – and by luck (he was born with a good share of it) be guessed more or less
right, as you will see. Having made up his mind he crept along as cleverly as he could. Hobbits are
clever at quietness, especially in woods, as  . have already told you; also Bilbo had slipped on his
ring before he started. That is why the spiders neither saw nor heard him coming.
He had picked his way stealthily ‘for some distance, when he noticed a place of dense black
shadow ahead of him black even for that forest, like a patch of midnight that had never been cleared
away. As he drew nearer, he saw that it was made by spider-webs one behind and over and tangled
with another.
Suddenly he saw, too, that there were spiders huge and horrible sitting in the branches above
him, and ring or no ring he trembled with fear lest they should discover him. Standing behind a tree
he watched a group of them for some time, and then in the silence and stillness of the wood he
realised that these loathsome creatures were speaking one to another. Their voices were a sort of
thin creaking and hissing, but he could make out many of the words that they said. They were
talking about the dwarves!
“It was a sharp struggle, but worth it,” said one. “What nasty thick skins they have to be sure,
but I’ll wager there is good juice inside.” “Aye, they’ll make fine eating, when they’ve hung a bit,”
said another. “Don’t hang ‘em too long,” said a third. “They’re not as fat as they might be. Been
feeding none too well of late, I should guess.” “Kill’em, I say,” hissed a fourth; “kill ‘em now and
hang ‘em dead for a while.”
“They’re dead now, I’ll warrant,” said the first.
“That they are not. I saw one a-struggling just now. Just coming round again, I should say,
after a bee-autiful sleep. I’ll show you.” With that one of the fat spiders ran along a rope, till it came
to a dozen bundles hanging in a row from a high branch. Bilbo was horrified, now that he noticed
them for the first time dangling in the shadows, to see a dwarvish foot sticking out of the bottoms of
some of the bundles, or here and there the tip of a nose, or a bit of beard or of a hood.
To the fattest of these bundles the spider went–“It is poor old Bombur, I’ll bet,” thought Bilbo
– and nipped hard at the nose that stuck out. There was a muffled yelp inside, and a toe shot up and
kicked the spider straight and hard. There was life in Bombur still. There was a noise like the
kicking of a flabby football, and the enraged spider fell off the branch, only catching itself with its
own thread just in time.
The others laughed. “You were quite right,” they said, “the meat’s alive and kicking!” “ “I’ll
soon put an end to that,” hissed the angry spider climbing back onto the branch.
Bilbo saw that the moment had come when he must do something. He could not get up at the
brutes and he had nothing to shoot with; but looking about he saw that in this place there were many
stones lying in what appeared to be a now dry little watercourse. Bilbo was a pretty fair shot with a
stone, and it did not take him long to find a nice smooth egg-shaped one that fitted his hand cosily.
As a boy he used to practise throwing stones at things, until rabbits and squirrels, and even
birds, got out of his way as quick as lightning if they saw him stoop; and even grownup he had still
spent a deal of his time at quoits, dart-throwing, shooting at the wand, bowls, ninepins and other
quiet games of the aiming and throwing sort-indeed he could do lots of things, besides blowing
smoke-rings, asking riddles and cooking, that I haven’t had time to tell you about. There is no timenow. While he was picking up stones, the spider had reached Bombur, and soon he would have been
dead. At that moment Bilbo threw. The stone struck the spider plunk on the head, and it dropped
senseless off the tree, flop to the ground, with all its legs curled up.
The next stone went whizzing through a big web, snapping its cords, and taking off the spider
sitting in the middle of it, whack, dead. After that there was a deal of commotion in the
spider-colony, and they forgot the dwarves for a bit, I can tell you. They could not see Bilbo, but
they could make a good guess at the direction from which the stones were coming. As quick as
lightning they came running and swinging towards the hobbit, flinging out their long threads in all
directions, till the air seemed full of waving snares. Bilbo, however, soon slipped away to a different
place. The idea came to him to lead the furious spiders further and further away from the dwarves,
if he could; to make them curious, excited and angry all at once. When about fifty had gone off to
the place where he had stood before, he threw some more stones at these, and at others that had
stopped behind; then dancing among the trees he began to sing a song to infuriate them and bring
them all after him,and also to let the dwarves hear his voice.
This is what he sang:
“Old fat spider spinning in a tree!
Old fat spider can’t see me!
Attercop! Attercop!
Won’t you stop,
Stop your spinning and look for me!
Old Tomnoddy, all big body,
Old Tomnoddy can’t spy me!
Attercop! Attercop!
Down you drop!
You’ll never catch me up your tree!”
Not very good perhaps, but then you must remember that he had to make it up himself, on the
spur of a very awkward moment. It did what he wanted any way. As he sang he threw some more
stones and stamped. Practically all the spiders in the place came after him: some dropped to the
ground, others raced along the branches, swung from tree to tree, or cast new ropes across the dark
spaces. They made for his noise far quicker than he had expected. They were frightfully angry.
Quite apart from the stones no spider has ever liked being called Attercop, and Tomnoddy of course
is insulting to anybody. Off Bilbo scuttled to a fresh place, but several of the spiders had run now to
different points in the glade where they lived, and were busy spinning webs across all the spaces
between the tree-stems. Very soon the hobbit would be caught in a thick fence of them all round
him-that at least was the spiders’ idea. Standing now in the middle of the hunting and spinning
insects Bilbo plucked up his courage and began a new song:
“Lazy Lob and crazy Cob
are weaving webs to wind me.
I am far more sweet than other meat,
but still they cannot find me!
Here am I, naughty little fly;
you are fat and lazy.
You cannot trap me, though you try,
in your cobwebs crazy.”
With that he turned and found that the last space between two tall trees had been closed with a
web-but luckily not a proper web, only great strands of double-thick spider-rope run hastily
backwards and forwards from trunk to trunk. Out came his little’ sword. He slashed the threads to
pieces and went off singing.
The spiders saw the sword, though I don’t suppose they knew what it was, and at once the
whole lot of them came hurrying after the hobbit along the ground and the branches, hairy legs
waving, nippers and spinners snapping, eyes popping, full of froth and rage. They followed him into
the forest until Bilbo had gone as far as he dared.Then quieter than a mouse he stole back. He had precious little time, he knew, before the
spiders were disgusted and came back to their trees where the dwarves were hung. In the meanwhile
he had to rescue them. The worst part of the job was getting up on to the long branch where the
bundles were dangling.
I don’t suppose he would have managed it, if a spider had not luckily left a rope hanging
down; with its help, though it stuck to his hand and hurt him, he scrambled up-only to meet an old
slow wicked fat-bodied spider who had remained behind to guard the prisoners, and had been busy
pinching them to see which was the juiciest to eat. It had thought of starting the feast while the
others were away, but Mr. Baggins was in a hurry, and before the spider knew what was happening
it felt his sting and rolled off the branch dead. Bilbo’s next job was to loose a dwarf. What was he to
do? If he cut the string which hung him up, the wretched dwarf would tumble thump to the ground a
good way below. Wriggling along the branch (which made all the poor dwarves dance and dangle
like ripe fruit) he reached the first bundle.
“Fili or Kili,” he thought by the tip of a blue hood sticking out at the top. “Most likely Fili,”
he thought by the tip of a long nose poking out of the winding threads. He managed by leaning over
to cut most of the strong sticky threads that bound him round, and then, sure enough, with a kick
and a struggle most of Fili emerged. I am afraid Bilbo actually laughed at the sight of him jerking
his stiff arms and legs as he danced on the spider-string under his armpits, just like one of those
funny toys bobbing on a wire. Somehow or other Fili was got on to the branch, and then he did his
best to help the hobbit, although he was feeling very sick and ill from spider-poison, and from
hanging most of the night and the next day wound round and round with only his nose to breathe
through. It took him ages to get the beastly stuff out of his eyes and eyebrows, and as for his beard,
he had to cut most of it off. Well, between them they started to haul up first one dwarf and then
another and slash them free. None of them were better off than Fili, and some of them were worse.
Some had hardly been able to breathe at all (long noses are sometimes useful you see), and some
had been more poisoned.
In this way they rescued Kili, Bifur, Bofur, Don and Nori. Poor old Bombur was so
exhausted-he was the fattest and had been constantly pinched and poked-that he just rolled off the
branch and fell plop on to the ground, fortunately on to leaves, and lay there. But there were still
five dwarves hanging at the end of the branch when the spiders began to come back, more full of
rage than ever. Bilbo immediately went to the end of the branch nearest the tree-trunk and kept back
those that crawled up. He had taken off his ring when he rescued Fili and forgotten to put it on
again, so now they all began to splutter and hiss:
“Now we see you, you nasty little creature! We will eat you and leave your bones and skin
hanging on a tree. Ugh! he’s got a sting has he? Well, we’ll get him all the same, and then we’ll
hang him head downwards for a day or two.”
While this was going on, the other dwarves were working at the rest of the captives, and
cutting at the threads with their knives. Soon all would be free, though it was not clear what would
happen after that. The spiders had caught them pretty easily the night before, but that had been
unawares and in the dark. This time there looked like being a horrible battle. Suddenly Bilbo
noticed that some of the spiders had gathered round old Bombur on the floor, and had tied him up
again and were dragging him away. He gave a shout and slashed at the spiders in front of him. They
quickly gave way, and he scrambled and fell down the tree right into the middle of those on the
ground. His little sword was something new in the way of stings for them. How it darted to and fro!
It shone with delight as he stabbed at them. Half a dozen were killed before the rest drew off and
left Bombur to Bilbo. “Come down! Come down!” he shouted to the dwarves on the branch. “Don’t
stay up there and be netted!” For he saw spiders swarming up all the neighboring trees, and
crawling along the boughs above the heads of the dwarves.
Down the dwarves scrambled or jumped or dropped, eleven all in a heap, most of them very
shaky and little use on their legs. There they were at last, twelve of them counting poor old Bombur,
who was being propped up on either side by his cousin Bifur, and his brother Bofur; and Bilbo was
dancing about and waving his Sting; and hundreds of angry spiders were goggling at them all roundand about and above. It looked pretty hopeless. Then the battle began. Some of the dwarves had
knives, and some had sticks, and all of them could get at stones; and Bilbo had his elvish dagger.
Again and again the spiders were beaten off, and many of them were killed. But it could not
go on for long. Bilbo was nearly tired out; only four of the dwarves were able to stand firmly, and
soon they would all be overpowered like weary flies. Already the spiders were beginning to weave
their webs all round them again from tree to tree. In the end Bilbo could think of no plan except to
let the dwarves into the secret of his ring. He was rather sorry about it, but it could not be helped.
“I am going to disappear,” he said. “I shall draw the spiders off, if I can; and you must keep
together and make in the opposite direction. To the left there, that is more or less the way towards
the place where we last saw the elf-fires.”
It was difficult to get them to understand, what with their dizzy heads, and the shouts, and the
whacking of sticks and the throwing of stones; but at last Bilbo felt he could delay no longer-the
spiders were drawing their circle ever closer. He suddenly slipped on his ring, and to the great
astonishment of the dwarves he vanished.
Soon there came the sound of “Lazy Lob” and “Attercop” from among the trees away on the
right. That upset the spiders greatly. They stopped advancing, and some, went off in the direction of
the voice. “Attercop” made them so angry that they lost their wits. Then Balin, who had grasped
Bilbo’s plan better than the rest, led an attack. The dwarves huddled together in a knot, and sending
a shower of stones they drove at the spiders on the left, and burst through the ring. Away behind
them now the shouting and singing suddenly stopped.
Hoping desperately that Bilbo had not been caught the dwarves went on. Not fast enough,
though. They were sick and weary, and they could not go much better than a hobble and a wobble,
though many of the spiders were close behind. Every now and then they had to turn and fight the
creatures that were overtaking them and already some spiders were in the trees above them and
throwing down their long clinging threads.
Things were looking pretty bad again, when suddenly Bilbo appeared and charged into the
astonished spiders unexpectedly from the side. “Go on! Go on!” he shouted. “I will do the
stinging!” And he did. He darted backwards and forwards, slashing at spider-threads, hacking at
their legs, and stabbing at their fat bodies if they came too near. The spiders swelled with rage, and
spluttered and frothed, and hissed out horrible curses; but they had become mortally afraid of Sting,
and dared not come very near, now that it had come back. So curse as they would, their prey moved
slowly but steadily away. It was a most terrible business, and seemed to take hours. But at last, just
when Bilbo felt that he could not lift his hand for a single stroke more, the spiders suddenly gave it
up, and followed them no more, but went back disappointed to their dark colony.
The dwarves then noticed that they had come to the edge of a ring where elf-fires had been.
Whether it was one of those they had seen the night before, they could not tell. But it seemed that
some good magic lingered in such spots, which the spiders did not like. At any rate here the light
was greener, and the boughs less thick and threatening, and they had a chance to rest and draw
breath.
There they lay for some time, puffing and panting. put very soon they began to ask questions.
They had to have the whole vanishing business carefully explained, and the finding of the ring
interested them so much that for a while they forgot their own troubles. Balin in particular insisted
on having the Gollum story, riddles and all, told all over again, with the ring in its proper place. But
after a time the light began to fail, and then other questions were asked. Where were they, and
where was their path, and where was there any food, and what were they going to do next? These
questions they asked over and over again, and it was from little Bilbo that they seemed to expect to
get the answers. From which you can see that they had changed their opinion of Mr. Baggins very
much, and had begun to have a great respect for him (as Gandalf had said they would). Indeed they
really expected him to think of some wonderful plan for helping them, and were not merely
grumbling. They knew only too well that they would soon all have been dead, if it had not been for
the hobbit; and they thanked him many times. Some of them even got up and bowed right to the
ground before him, though they fell over with the effort, and could not get on their legs again forsome time. Knowing the truth about the vanishing did not lessen their opinion of Bilbo at all; for
they saw that he had some wits, as well as luck and a magic ring-and all three are very useful
possessions. In fact they praised him so much that Bilbo began to feel there really was something of
a bold adventurer about himself after all, though he I would have felt a lot bolder still, if there had
been anything to eat.
But there was nothing, nothing at all; and none of them Were fit to go and look for anything,
or to search for the lost path. The lost path! No other idea would come into Bilbo’s tired head. He
just sat staring in front of him at the endless trees; and after a while they all fell silent again. All
except Balin. Long after the others had stopped talking and shut their eyes, he kept on muttering
and chuckling to himself.
“Gollum! Well I’m blest! So that’s how he sneaked past me is it? Now I know! Just crept
quietly along did you, Mr. Baggins? Buttons all over the doorstep? Good old
Bilbo-Bilbo-Bilbo-bo-bo-bo-“ And then he fell asleep, and there was complete silence for a long
time.
All of a sudden Dwalin opened an eye, and looked round at them. “Where is Thorin?” he
asked. It was a terrible shock. Of course there were only thirteen of them, twelve dwarves and the
hobbit. Where indeed was Thorin? They wondered what evil fate had befallen him, magic or dark
monsters; and shuddered as they lay lost in the forest. There they dropped off one by one into
uncomfortable sleep full of horrible dreams, as evening wore to black night; and there we must
leave them for the present, too sick and weary to set guards or take turns watching.
Thorin had been caught much faster than they had. You remember Bilbo falling like a log into
sleep, as he stepped into a circle of light? The next time it had been Thorin who stepped forward,
and as the lights went out he fell like a stone enchanted. All the noise of the dwarves lost in the
night, their cries as the spiders caught them and bound them, and all the sounds of the battle next
day, had passed over him unheard. Then the Wood-elves had come to him, and bound him, and
carried him away. The feasting people were Wood-elves, of course. These are not wicked folk. If
they have a fault it is distrust of strangers. Though their magic was strong, even in those days they
were wary. They differed from the High Elves of the West, and were more dangerous and less wise.
For most of them (together with their scattered relations in the hills and mountains) were descended
from the ancient tribes that never went to Faerie in the West. There the Light-elves and the
Deep-elves and the Sea-elves went and lived for ages, and grew fairer and wiser and more learned,
and invented their magic and their cunning craft, in the making of beautiful and marvellous things,
before some came back into the Wide World. In the Wide World the Wood-elves lingered in the
twilight of our Sun and Moon but loved best the stars; and they wandered in the great forests that
grew tall in lands that are now lost. They dwelt most often by the edges of the woods, from which
they could escape at times to hunt, or to ride and run over the open lands by moonlight or starlight;
and after the coming of Men they took ever more and more to the gloaming and the dusk. Still elves
they were and remain, and that is Good People.
In a great cave some miles within the edge of Mirkwood on its eastern side there lived at this
time their greatest king. Before his huge doors of stone a river ran out of the heights of the forest
and flowed on and out into the marshes at the feet of the high wooded lands. This great cave, from
which countless smaller ones opened out on every side, wound far underground and had many
passages and wide halls; but it was lighter and more wholesome than any goblin-dwelling, and
neither so deep nor so dangerous. In fact the subjects of the king mostly lived and hunted in the
open woods, and had houses or huts on the ground and in the branches. The beeches were their
favourite trees. The king’s cave was his palace, and the strong place of his treasure, and the fortress
of his people against their enemies.
It was also the dungeon of his prisoners. So to the cave they dragged Thorin-not too gently,
for they did not love dwarves, and thought he was an enemy. In ancient days they had had wars with
some of the dwarves, whom they accused of stealing their treasure. It is only fair to say that the
dwarves gave a different account, and said that they only took what was their due, for the elf -king
had bar– gained with them to shape his raw gold and silver, and had afterwards refused to give themtheir pay. If the elf-king had a weakness it was for treasure, especially for silver and white gems;
and though his hoard was rich, he was ever eager for more, since he had not yet as great a treasure
as other elf-lords of old. His people neither mined nor worked metals or jewels, nor did they bother
much with trade or with tilling the earth. All this was well known to every dwarf, though Thorin’s
family had had nothing to do with the old quarrel I have spoken of. Consequently Thorin was angry
at their treatment of him, when they took their spell off him and he came to his senses; and also he
was determined that no word of gold or jewels should be dragged out of him.
The king looked sternly on Thorin, when he was brought before him, and asked him many
questions. But Thorin would only say that he was starving. “Why did you and your folk three times
try to attack my people at their merrymaking?” asked the king.
“We did not attack them,” answered Thorin; “we came to beg, because we were starving.”
“Where are your friends now, and what are they doing?”
“I don’t know, but I expect starving in the forest.”
“What were you doing in the forest?”
“Looking for food and drink, because we were starving.”
“But what brought you into the forest at all?” asked the king angrily.
At that Thorin shut his mouth and would not say another word. “Very well!” said the king.
“Take him away and keep him safe, until he feels inclined to tell the truth, even if he waits a
hundred years.’” Then the elves put thongs on him, and shut him in one of the inmost caves with
strong wooden doors, and left him. They gave him food and drink, plenty of both, if not very fine;
for Wood-elves were not goblins, and were reasonably well-behaved even to their worst enemies,
when they captured them. The giant spiders were the only living things that they had no mercy
upon. There in the king’s dungeon poor Thorin lay; and after he had got over his thankfulness for
bread and meat and water, he began to wonder what had become of his unfortunate friends. It was
not very long before he discovered; but that belongs to the next chapter and the beginning of
another adventure in which the hobbit again showed his usefulness.
Chapter  
Barrels Out of Bond
The day after the battle with the spiders Bilbo and the dwarves made one last despairing effort
to find a way out before they died of hunger and thirst. They got up and staggered on in the
direction which eight out of the thirteen of them guessed to be the one in which the path lay; but
they never found out if they were right. Such day as there ever was in the forest was fading once
more into the blackness of night, when suddenly out sprang the light of many torches all round
them, like hundreds of red stars. Out leaped Wood-elves with their bows and spears and called the
dwarves to halt. There was no thought of a fight. Even if the dwarves had not been in such a state
that they were actually glad to be captured, their small knives, the only weapons they had, would
have been of no use against the arrows of the elves that could hit a bird’s eye in the dark. So they
simply stopped dead and sat down and waited-all except Bilbo, who popped on his ring and slipped
quickly to one side.
That is why, when the elves bound the dwarves in a long line, one behind the other, and
counted them, they never found or counted the hobbit. Nor did they hear or feel him trotting along
well behind their torch-light as they led off their prisoners into the forest. Each dwarf was blindfold,
but that did not make much difference, for even Bilbo with the use of his eyes could not see where
they were going, and neither he nor the others knew where they had started from anyway. Bilbo had
all he could do to keep up with the torches, for the elves were making the dwarves go as fast as ever
they could, sick and weary as they were. The king had ordered them to make haste. Suddenly the
torches stopped, and the hobbit had just time to catch them up before they began to cross the bridge.
This was the bridge that led across the river to the king’s doors. The water flowed dark and swift
and strong beneath; and at the far end were gates before the mouth of a huge cave that ran into the
side of a steep slope covered with trees. There the great beeches came right down to the bank, tilltheir feet were in the stream. Across this bridge the elves thrust their prisoners, but Bilbo hesitated
in the rear. He did not at all like the look of the cavern-mouth and he only made up his mind not to
desert his friends just in time to scuttle over at the heels of the fast elves, before the great gates of
the king closed behind them with a clang. Inside the passages were lit with red torch-light, and the
elf-guards sang as they marched along the twisting, crossing, and echoing paths. These were not
like those of the goblin-cities: they were smaller, less deep underground, and filled with a cleaner
air. In a great hall with pillars hewn out of the living stone sat the Elvenking on a chair of carven
wood. On his head was a crown of berries and red leaves, for the autumn was come again. In the
spring he wore a crown of woodland flowers. In his hand he held a carven staff of oak.
The prisoners were brought before him; and though he looked grimly at them, he told his men
to unbind them, for they were ragged and weary. “Besides they need no ropes in here,” said he.
“There is no escape from my magic doors for those who are once brought inside.”
Long and searchingly he questioned the dwarves about their doings, and where they were
going to, and where they were coming from; but he got little more news out of them than out of
Thorin. They were surly and angry and did not even pretend to be polite.
“What have we done, O king?” said Balin, who was the eldest left. “Is it a crime to be lost in
the forest, to be hungry and thirsty, to be trapped by spiders? Are the spiders your tame beasts or
your pets, if killing them makes you angry?” Such a question of course made the king angrier than
ever, and he answered: “It is a crime to wander in my realm without leave. Do you forget that you
were in my kingdom, using the road that my people made? Did you not three times pursue and
trouble my people in the forest and ‘ rouse the spiders with your riot and clamour? After all the
disturbance you have made I have a right to know what brings you here, and if you will not tell me
now, I will keep you all in prison until you have learned sense and manners!” Then he ordered the
dwarves each to be put in a separate cell and to be given food and drink, but not to be allowed to
pass the doors of their little prisons, until one at least of them was willing to tell him all he wanted
to know. But be did not tell them that Thorin was also a prisoner with him. It was Bilbo who found
that out.
Poor Mr. Baggins – it was a weary long time that he lived in that place all alone, and always
in hiding, never daring to take off his ring, hardly daring to sleep, even tucked away in the darkest
and remotest comers he could find. For something to do he took to wandering about the
Elven-king’s palace. Magic shut the gates, but be could sometimes get out, if he was quick.
Companies of the Wood-elves, sometimes with the king at their head, would from time to time ride
out to hunt, or to other business in the woods and in the lands to the East. Then if Bilbo was very
nimble, he could slip out just behind them; though it was a dangerous thing to do. More than once
he was nearly caught in the doors, as they clashed together when the last elf passed, yet he did not
dare to march among them because of his shadow (altogether thin and wobbly as it was in
torch-light), or for fear of being bumped into and discovered. And when he did go out, which was
not very often, he did no good. He did not wish to desert the dwarves, and indeed he did not know
where in the world to go without them. He could not keep up with the hunting elves all the time
they were out, so he never discovered the ways out of the wood, and was left to wander miserably
in the forest, terrified of losing himself, until a chance came of returning. He was hungry too
outside, for he was no hunter; but inside the caves he could pick up a living of some sort by stealing
food from store or table when no one was at hand. “I am like a burglar that can’t get away, but must
go on miserably burgling the same house day after day,” he thought. “This is the dreariest and
dullest part of all this wretched, tiresome, uncomfortable adventure! I wish I was back in my
hobbit-hole by my own warm fireside with the lamp shining!” He often wished, too, that he could
get a message for help sent to the wizard, but that of course was quite impossible; and he soon
realized that if anything was to be done, it would have to be done by Mr. Baggins, alone and
unaided.
Eventually, after a week or two of this sneaking sort of life, by watching and following the
guards and taking what chances he could, he managed to find out where each dwarf was kept. He
found all their twelve cells in different parts of the palace, and after a time he got to know his wayabout very well. What was his surprise one day to overhear some of the guards talking and to learn
that there was another dwarf in prison too, in a specially deep dark place. He guessed at once, of
course, that that was Thorin; and after a while he found that his guess was right. At last after many
difficulties he managed to find the place when no one was about, and to have a word with the chief
of the dwarves. Thorin was too wretched to be angry any longer at his misfortunes, and was even
beginning to think of telling the king all about his treasure and his quest (which shows how
low-spirited he had become), when he heard Bilbo’s little voice at his keyhole. He could hardly
believe his ears. Soon however he made up his mind that he could not be mistaken, and he came to
the door and had a long whispered talk with the hobbit on the other side.
So it was that Bilbo was able to take secretly Thorin’s message to each of the other
imprisoned dwarves, telling them that Thorin their chief was also in prison close at hand, and that
no one was to reveal their errand to the long, not yet, not before Thorin gave the word. For Thorin
had taken heart again hearing how the hobbit had rescued his companions from the spiders, and was
determined once more not to ransom himself with promises to the king of a share in the treasure,
until all hope of escaping in any other way had disappeared; until in fact the remarkable Mr.
Invisible Baggins (of whom he began to have a very high opinion indeed) had altogether failed to
think of something clever.
The other dwarves quite agreed when they got the message. They all thought their own shares
in the treasure (which they quite regarded as theirs, in spite of their plight and the still unconquered
dragon) would suffer seriously if the Wood-elves claimed part of it, and they all trusted Bilbo. Just
what Gandalf had said would happen, you see. Perhaps that war part of his reason for going off and
leaving them.
Bilbo, however, did not feel nearly so hopeful as they did. He did not like being depended on
by everyone, and he wished he had the wizard at hand.
But that was no use: probably all the dark distance of Mirkwood lay between them. He sat and
thought and thought, until his head nearly burst, but no bright idea would come. One invisible ring
was a very fine thing, but it was not much good among fourteen. But of course, as you have
guessed, he did rescue his friends in the end, and this is how it happened. One day, nosing and
wandering about. Bilbo discovered a very interesting thing: the great gates were not the only
entrance to the caves. A stream flowed under part of the lowest regions of the palace, and joined the
Forest River some way further to the east, beyond the steep slope out of which the main mouth
opened. Where this underground watercourse came forth from the hillside there was a water-gate.
There the rocky roof came down close to the surface of the stream, and from it a portcullis could be
dropped right to the bed of the river to prevent anyone coming in or out that way. But the portcullis
was often open, for a good deal of traffic went out and in by the water-gate. If anyone had come in
that way, he would have found himself in a dark rough tunnel leading deep into the heart of the hill;
but at one point where it passed under the caves the roof had been cut away and covered with great
oaken trapdoors. These opened upwards into the king’s cellars. There stood barrels, and barrels, and
barrels; for the Wood-elves, and especially their king, were very fond of wine, though no vines grew
in those parts. The wine, and other goods, were brought from far away, from their kinsfolk in the
South, or from the vineyards of Men in distant lands.
Hiding behind one of the largest barrels Bilbo discovered the trapdoors and their use, and
lurking there, listening to the talk of the king’s servants, he learned how the wine and other goods
came up the rivers, or over land, to the Long Lake. It seemed a town of Men still throve there, built
out on bridges far into the water as a protection against enemies of all sorts, and especially against
the dragon of the Mountain. From Lake-town the barrels were brought up the Forest River. Often
they were just tied together like big rafts and poled or rowed up the stream; sometimes they were
loaded on to flat boats.
When the barrels were empty the elves cast them through the trapdoors, opened the
water-gate, and out the barrels floated on the stream, bobbing along, until they were carried by the
current to a place far down the river where the bank jutted out, near to the very eastern edge of
Mirkwood. There they were collected and tied together and floated back to Lake-town, which stoodclose to the point where the Forest River flowed into the Long Lake. For some time Bilbo sat and
thought about this water-gate, and wondered if it could be used for the escape of his friends, and at
last he had the desperate beginnings of a plan.
The evening meal had been taken to the prisoners. The guards were tramping away down the
passages taking the torch-light with them and leaving everything in darkness. Then Bilbo heard the
king’s butler bidding the chief of the guards good-night.
“Now come with me,” he said, “and taste the new wine that has just come in. I shall be hard at
work tonight clearing the cellars of the empty wood, so let us have a drink first to help the labour.”
“Very good,” laughed the chief of the guards. “I’ll taste with you, and see if it is fit for the
king’s table. There is a feast tonight and it would not do to send up poor stuff!”
When he heard this Bilbo was all in a flutter, for he saw that luck was with him and he had a
chance at once to try his desperate plan. He followed the two elves, until they entered a small cellar
and sat down at a table on which two large flagons were set. Soon they began to drink and laugh
merrily. Luck of an unusual kind was with Bilbo then. It must be potent wine to make a wood-elf
drowsy; but this wine, it would seem, was the heady vintage of the great gardens of Dorwinion, not
meant for his soldiers or his servants, but for the king’s feasts only, and for smaller bowls, not for
the butler’s great flagons.
Very soon the chief guard nodded his head, then he laid it on the table and fell fast asleep. The
butler went on talking and laughing to himself for a while without seeming to notice, but soon his
head too nodded to the table, and he fell asleep and snored beside his friend. Then in crept the
hobbit.
Very soon the chief guard had no keys, but Bilbo was trotting as fast as he could along the
passage towards the cells. The great bunch seemed very heavy to his arms, and his heart was often
in his mouth, in spite of his ring, for he could not prevent the keys from making every now and then
a loud clink and clank, which put him all in a tremble.
First he unlocked Balin’s door, and locked it again carefully as soon as the dwarf was outside.
Balin was most surprised, as you can imagine; but glad as he was to get out of his wearisome little
stone room, he wanted to stop and ask questions, and know what Bilbo was going to do, and all
about it. “No time now!” said the hobbit. “You must follow me! We must all keep together and not
risk getting separated. All of us must escape or none, and this is our last chance. If this is found out,
goodness knows where the king will put you next, with chains on your hands and feet too, I expect.
Don’t argue, there’s a good fellow!”
Then off he went from door to door, until his following had grown to twelve-none of them
any too nimble, what with the dark, and what with their long imprisonment. Bilbo’s heart thumped
every time one of them bumped into another, or grunted or whispered in the dark. “Drat this
dwarvish racket!” he said to himself. But all went well, and they met no guards. As a matter of fact
there was a great autumn feast in the woods that night, and in the halls above. Nearly all the king’s
folks were merrymaking. At last after much blundering they came to Thorin’s dungeon, far down in
a deep place and fortunately not far from the cellars.
“Upon my word!” said Thorin, when Bilbo whispered to him to come out and join his friends,
“Gandalf spoke true, as usual. A pretty fine burglar you make, it seems, when the time comes. I am
sure we are all for ever at your service, whatever happens after this. But what comes next?” Bilbo
saw that the time had come to explain his idea, as far as he could; but he did not feel at all sure bow
the dwarves would take it. His fears were quite justified, for they did not like it a bit, and started
grumbling loudly in spite of their danger.
“We shall be bruised and battered to pieces, and drowned too, for certain!” they muttered.
“We thought you had got some sensible notion, when you managed to get hold of the keys. This is a
mad idea!” “Very well!” said Bilbo very downcast, and also rather annoyed. “Come along back to
your nice cells, and I will lock you all in again, and you can sit there comfortably and think of a
better plan-but I don’t suppose I shall ever get hold of the keys again, even if I feel inclined to try.”
“That was too much for them, and they calmed down. In the end, of course, they had to do just what
Bilbo suggested, because it was obviously impossible for them to try and find their way into theupper halls, or to fight their way out of gates that closed by magic; and it was no good grumbling in
the passages until they were caught again. So following the hobbit, down into the lowest cellars
they crept. They passed a door through which the chief guard and the butler could be seen still
happily snoring with smiles upon their faces. The wine of Dorwinion brings deep and pleasant
dreams. There would be a different expression on the face of the chief guard next day, even though
Bilbo, before they went on, stole in and kindheartedly put the keys back on his belt.
“That will save him some of the trouble he is in for,” said Mr. Baggins to himself. “He wasn’t
a bad fellow, and quite decent to the prisoners. It will puzzle them all too. They will think we had a
very strong magic to pass through all those locked doors and disappear. Disappear! We have got to
get busy very quick, if that is to happen!”
Balin was told off to watch the guard and the butler and give warning if they stirred. The rest
went into the adjoining cellar with the trapdoors.
There was little time to lose. Before long, as Bilbo knew, some elves were under orders to
come down and help the butler get the empty barrels through the doors into the stream. These were
in fact already standing in rows in the middle of the floor waiting to be pushed off. Some of them
were wine-barrels, and these were not much use, as they could not easily be opened at the end
without a deal of noise, nor could they easily be secured again. But among them were several others
which had been used for bringing other stuffs, butter, apples, and all sorts of things, to the king’s
palace. They soon found thirteen with room enough for a dwarf in each. In fact some were too
roomy, and as they climbed in the dwarves thought anxiously of the shaking and the bumping they
would get inside, though Bilbo did his best to find straw and other stuff to pack them in as cosily as
could be managed in a short time. At last twelve dwarves were stowed. Thorin had given a lot of
trouble, and turned and twisted in his tub and grumbled like a large dog in a small kennel; while
Balin, who came last, made a great fuss about his air-holes and said he was stifling, even before his
lid was on. Bilbo had done what he could to close holes in the sides of the barrels, and to fix on all
the lids as safely as could be managed, and now he was left alone again, running round putting the
finishing touches-to the packing, and hoping against hope that his plan would come off.
It had not been a-bit too soon. Only a minute or two after Balin’s lid had been fitted on there
came the sound of voices and the flicker of lights. A number of elves came laughing and talking into
the cellars and singing snatches of song. They had left a merry feast in one of the halls and were
bent on returning as soon as they could. “Where’s old Galion, the butler?” said one. “I haven’t seen
him at the tables tonight. He ought to be here now to show us what is to be done.”
“I shall be angry if the old slowcoach is late,” said another. “I have no wish to waste time
down here while the song is up!”
“Ha, ha!” came a cry. “Here’s the old villain with his head on a jug!
He’s been having a little feast all to himself and his friend the captain.” “Shake him! Wake
him!” shouted the others impatiently. Gallon was not at all pleased at being shaken or wakened, and
still less at being laughed at. “You’re all late,” he grumbled. “Here am I waiting and waiting down
here, while you fellows drink and make merry and forget your tasks. Small wonder if I fall asleep
from weariness!”
“Small wonder,” said they, “when the explanation stands close at hand in a jug! Come give us
a taste of your sleeping-draught before we fall to! No need to wake the turnkey yonder. He has had
his share by the looks of it.” Then they drank once round and became mighty merry all of a sudden.
But they did not quite lose their wits. “Save us, Galion!” cried some, “you began your feasting early
and muddled your wits! You have stacked some full casks here instead of the empty ones, if there is
anything in weight.” “Get on with the work!” growled the butler. “There is nothing in the feeling of
weight in an idle toss-pot’s arms. These are the ones to go and no others. Do as I say!”
“Very well, very well,” they answered rolling the barrels to the opening. “On your head be it,
if the king’s full buttertubs and his best wine is pushed into the river for the Lake-men to feast on
for nothing!”
“Roll-roll-roll-roll,
roll-roll-rolling down the hole IHeave ho! Splash plump !
Down they go, down they bump!”
So they sang as first one barrel and then another rumbled to the dark opening and was pushed
over into the cold water some feet below. Some were barrels really empty, some were tubs neatly
packed with a dwarf each; but down they all went, one after another, with many a clash and a bump,
thudding on top of ones below, smacking into the water, jostling against the walls of the tunnel,
knocking into one another, and bobbing away down the current.
It was just at this moment that Bilbo suddenly discovered the weak point in his plan. Most
likely you saw it some time ago and have been laughing at him; but I don’t suppose you would have
done half as well yourselves in his place. Of course he was not in a barrel himself, nor was there
anyone to pack him in, even if there had been a chance! It looked as if he would certainly lose his
friends this time (nearly all of them had already disappeared through the dark trap-door), and get
utterly left behind and have to stay lurking as a permanent burglar in the elf-caves for ever. For even
if he could have escaped through the upper gates at once, he had precious small chance of ever
finding the dwarves again. He did not know the way by land to the place where the barrels were
collected. He wondered what on earth would happen to them without him; for he had not had time
to tell the dwarves all that he had learned, or what he had meant to do, once they were out of the
wood. While all these thoughts were passing through his mind, the elves being very merry began to
sing a song round the river-door. Some had already gone to haul on the ropes which pulled up the
portcullis at the water-gate so as to let out the barrels as soon as they were all afloat below.
“Down the swift dark stream you go
Back to lands you once did know!
Leave the halls and caverns deep,
Leave the northern mountains steep,
Where the forest wide and dim
Stoops in shadow grey and grim!
Float beyond the world of trees
Out into the whispering breeze,
Past the rushes, past the reeds,
Past the marsh’s waving weeds,
Through the mist that riseth white
Up from mere and pool at night!
Follow, follow stars that leap
Up the heavens cold and steep;
Turn when dawn comes over land,
Over rapid, over sand,
South away! and South away!
Seek the sunlight and the day,
Back to pasture, back to mead,
Where the kine and oxen feed!
Back to gardens on the hills
Where the berry swells and fills
Under sunlight, under day!
South away! and South away!
Down the swift dark stream you go
Back to lands you once did know!”
Now the very last barrel was being rolled to the doors! In despair and not knowing what else
to do, poor little Bilbo caught hold of it and was pushed over the edge with it. Down into the water
he fell, splash! into the cold dark water with the barrel on top of him. He came up again spluttering
and clinging to the wood like a rat, but for all his efforts he could not scramble on top. Every time
he tried, the barrel rolled round and ducked him under again. It was really empty, and floated light
as a cork. Though his ears were full of water, he could hear the elves still singing in the cellarabove. Then suddenly the trapdoors fell to with a boom and their voices faded away. He was in the
dark tunnel, floating in icy water, all alone-for you cannot count friends that are all packed up in
barrels.
Very soon a grey patch came up in the darkness ahead. He heard the creak of the water-gate
being hauled up, and he found that he was in the midst of a bobbing and bumping mass of casks and
tubs all pressing together to pass under the arch and get out into the open stream. He had as much as
he could do to prevent himself from being hustled and battered to bits; but at last the jostling crowd
began to break up and swing off, one by one, under the stone arch and away. Then he saw that it
would have been no good even if he had managed to get astride his barrel, for there was no room to
spare, not even for a hobbit, between its top and the suddenly stooping roof where the gate was.
Out they went under the overhanging branches of the trees on either bank. Bilbo wondered
what the dwarves were feeling and whether a lot of water was getting into their tubs. Some of those
that bobbed along by him in the gloom seemed pretty low in the water, and he guessed that these
had dwarves inside. “I do hope I put the lids on tight enough!” he thought, but before long he was
worrying too much about himself to remember the dwarves. He managed to keep his head above the
water, but he was shivering with the cold, and he wondered if he would die of it before the luck
turned, and how much longer he would be able to hang on, and whether he should risk the chance of
letting go and trying to swim to the bank.
The luck turned all right before long: the eddying current carried several barrels close ashore
at one point and there for a while they stuck against some hidden root. Then Bilbo took the
opportunity of scrambling up the side of his barrel while it was held steady against another. Up he
crawled like a drowned rat, and lay on the top spread out to keep the balance as best he could. The
breeze was cold but better than the water, and he hoped he would not suddenly roll off again when
they started off once more. Before long the barrels broke free again and turned and twisted off down
the stream, and out into the main current Then he found it quite as difficult to stick on as he had
feared; but he managed it somehow, though it was miserably uncomfortable. Luckily he was very
light, and the barrel was a good big one and being rather leaky had now shipped a small amount of
water. All the same it was like trying to ride, without bridle or stirrups, a round-bellied pony that
was always thinking of rolling on the grass. In this way at last Mr. Baggins came to a place where
the trees on either hand grew thinner. He could see the paler sky between them. The dark river
opened suddenly wide, and there it was joined to the main water of the Forest River flowing down
in haste from the king’s great doors. There was a dim sheet of water no longer overshadowed, and
on its sliding surface there were dancing and broken reflections of clouds and of stars. Then the
hurrying water of the Forest River swept all the company of casks and tubs away to the north bank,
in which it had eaten out a wide bay. This had a shingly shore under hanging banks and was walled
at the eastern end by a little jutting cape of hard rock. On the shallow shore most of the barrels ran
aground, though a few went on to bump against the stony pier. There were people on the look-out
on the banks. They quickly poled and pushed all the barrels together into the shallows, and when
they had counted them they roped them together and left them till the morning. Poor dwarves! Bilbo
was not so badly off now. He slipped from his barrel and waded ashore, and then sneaked along to
some huts that he could see near the water’s edge. He no longer thought twice about picking up a
supper uninvited if he got the chance, he had been obliged to do it for so long, and he knew only too
well what it was to be really hungry, not merely politely interested in the dainties of a well-filled
larder. Also he had caught a glimpse of a fire through the trees, and that appealed to him with his
dripping and ragged clothes clinging to him cold and clammy.
There is no need to tell you much of his adventures that night, for now we are drawing near
the end of the eastward journey and coming to the last and greatest adventure, so we must hurry on.
Of course helped by his magic ring he got on very well at first, but he was given away in the end by
his wet footsteps and the trail of drippings that he left wherever he went or sat; and also he began to
snivel, and wherever he tried to hide he was found out by the terrific explosions of his suppressed
sneezes. Very soon there was a fine commotion in the village by the riverside; but Bilbo escaped
into the woods carrying a loaf and a leather bottle of wine and a pie that did not belong to him. Therest of the night he had to pass wet as he was and far from a fire, but the bottle helped him to do
that, and he actually dozed a little on some dry leaves, even though the year was getting late and the
air was chilly.
He woke again with a specially loud sneeze. It was already grey morning, and there was a
merry racket down by the river. They were making up a raft of barrels, and the raft-elves would
soon be steering it off down the stream to Lake-town. Bilbo sneezed again. He was no longer
dripping but he felt cold all over. He scrambled down as fast as his stiff legs would take him and
managed just in time to get on to the mass of casks without being noticed in the general bustle.
Luckily there was no sun at the time to cast an awkward shadow, and for a mercy he did not sneeze
again for a good while. There was a mighty pushing of poles. The elves that were standing in the
shallow.water heaved and shoved. The barrels now all lashed together creaked and fretted..
“This is a heavy load!” some grumbled. “They float too deep-some of these are never empty.
If they had come ashore in the daylight, we might have had a look inside,” they said.
“No time now!” cried the raftman. “Shove off!”
And off they went at last, slowly at first, until they had passed the point of rock where other
elves stood to fend them off with poles, and then quicker and quicker as they caught the main
stream and went sailing away down, down towards the Lake.
They had escaped the dungeons of the king and were through the wood, but whether alive or
dead still remains to be seen.
Chapter   
A Warm Welcome
The day grew lighter and warmer as they floated along. After a while the river rounded a steep
shoulder of land that came down upon their left. Under its rocky feet like an inland cliff the deepest
stream had flowed lapping and bubbling. Suddenly the cliff fell away. The shores sank. The trees
ended. Then Bilbo saw a sight: The lands opened wide about him, filled with the waters of the river
which broke up and wandered in a hundred winding courses, or halted in marshes and pools dotted
with isles on every side: but still a strong water flowed on steadily through the midst. And far away,
its dark head in a torn cloud, there loomed the Mountain! Its nearest neighbours to the North-East
and the tumbled land that joined it to them could not be seen. All alone it rose and looked across the
marshes to the forest. The Lonely Mountain! Bilbo had come far and through many adventures to
see it, and now he did not like the look of it in the least.
As he listened to the talk of the raftmen and pieced together the scraps of information they let
fall, he soon realized that he was very fortunate ever to have seen it at all, even from this distance.
Dreary as had been his imprisonment and unpleasant as was his position (to say nothing of the poor
dwarves underneath him) still, he had been more lucky than he had guessed. The talk was all of the
trade that came and went on the waterways and the growth of the traffic on the river, as the roads
out of the East towards Mirkwood vanished or fell into disuse; and of the bickerings of the
Lake-men and the Wood-elves about the upkeep of the Forest River and the care of the banks.
Those lands had changed much since the days when dwarves dwelt in the Mountain, days
which most people now remembered only as a very shadowy tradition. They had changed even in
recent years, and since the last news that Gandalf had had of them. Great floods and rains had
swollen the waters that flowed east; and there had been an earthquake or two (which some were
inclined to attribute to the dragon-alluding to him chiefly with a curse and an ominous nod in the
direction of the Mountain). The marshes and bogs had spread wider and wider on either side. Paths
had vanished, and many a rider and wanderer too, if they had tried to find the lost ways across. The
elf-road through the wood which the dwarves had followed on the advice of Beorn now came to a
doubtful and little used end at the eastern edge of the forest; only the river offered any longer a safe
way from the skirts of Mirkwood in the North to the mountain-shadowed plains beyond, and the
river was guarded by the Wood-elves’ king.
So you see Bilbo had come in the end by the only road that was any good. It might have beensome comfort to Mr. Baggins shivering on the barrels, if he had known that news of this had
reached Gandalf far away and given him great anxiety, and that he was in fact finishing his other
business (which does not come into this tale) and getting ready to come in search of Thorin’s
company. But Bilbo did not know it.
All he knew was that the river seemed to go on and on and on for ever, and he was hungry,
and had a nasty cold in the nose, and did not like the way the Mountain seemed to frown at him and
threaten him as it drew ever nearer. After a while, however, the river took a more southerly course
and the Mountain receded again, and at last, late in the day the shores grew rocky, the river gathered
all its wandering waters together into a deep and rapid flood, and they swept along at great speed.
The sun had set when turning with another sweep towards the East the forest-river rushed into
the Long Lake. There it had a wide mouth with stony clifflike gates at either side whose feet were
piled with shingles. The Long Lake! Bilbo had never imagined that any water that was not the sea
could look so big. It was so wide that the opposite shores looked small and far, but it was so long
that its northerly end, which pointed towards the Mountain, could not be seen at all. Only from the
map did Bilbo know that away up there, where the stars of the Wain were already twinkling, the
Running River came down into the lake from Dale and with the Forest River filled with deep waters
what must once have been a great deep rocky valley. At the southern end the doubled waters poured
out again over high waterfalls and ran away hurriedly to unknown lands. In the still evening air the
noise of the falls could be heard like a distant roar.
Not far from the mouth of the Forest River was the strange town he heard the elves speak of
in the king’s cellars. It was not built on the shore, though there were a few huts and buildings there,
but right out on the surface of the lake, protected from the swirl of the entering river by a
promontory of rock which formed a calm bay. A great. bridge made of wood ran out to where on
huge piles made of forest trees was built a busy wooden town, not a town of elves but of Men, who
still dared to dwell here under the shadow of the distant dragon-mountain. They still throve on the
trade that came up the great river from the South and was carted past the falls to their town; but in
the great days of old, when Dale in the North was rich and prosperous, they had been wealthy and
powerful, and there had been fleets of boats on the waters, and some were filled with gold and some
with warriors in armour, and there had been wars and deeds which were now only a legend. The
rotting piles of a greater town could still be seen along the shores when the waters sank in a
drought.
But men remembered little of all that, though some still sang old songs of the dwarf-kings of
the Mountain, Thror and Thrain of the race of Durin, and of the coming of the Dragon, and the fall
of the lords of Dale. Some sang too that Thror and Thrain would come back one day and gold
would flow in rivers through the mountain-gates, and all that land would be filled with new song
and new laughter. But this pleasant legend did not much affect their daily business.
As soon as the raft of barrels came in sight boats rowed out from the piles of the town, and
voices hailed the raft-steerers. Then ropes were cast and oars were pulled, and soon the raft was
drawn out of the current of the Forest River and towed away round the high shoulder of rock into
the little bay of Lake-town. There it was moored not far from the shoreward head of the great
bridge. Soon men would come up from the South and take some of the casks away, and others they
would fill with goods they had brought to be taken back up the stream to the Wood-elves’ home. In
the meanwhile the barrels were left afloat while the elves of the raft and the boatmen went to feast
in Lake-town.
They would have been surprised, if they could have seen what happened down by the shore,
after they had gone and the shades of night had fallen. First of all a barrel was cut loose by Bilbo
and pushed to the shore and opened. Groans came from inside, and out crept a most unhappy dwarf.
Wet straw was in his draggled beard; he was so sore and stiff, so bruised and buffeted he could
hardly stand or stumble through the shallow water to lie groaning on the shore. He had a famished
and a savage look like a dog that has been chained and forgotten in a kennel for a week. It was
Thorin, but you could only have told it by his golden chain, and by the colour of his now dirty and
tattered sky-blue hood with its tarnished silver tassel. It was some time before he would be evenpolite to the hobbit.
“Well, are you alive or are you dead?” asked Bilbo quite crossly. Perhaps he had forgotten that
he had had at least one good meal more than the dwarves, and also the use of his arms and legs, not
to speak of a greater allowance of air. “Are you still in prison, or are you free? If you want food, and
if you want to go on with this silly adventure– it’s yours after all and not mine-you had better slap
your arms and rub your legs and try and help me get the others out while there is a chance!”
Thorin of course saw the sense of this, so after a few more groans he got up and helped the
hobbit as well as he could. In the darkness floundering in the cold water they had a difficult and
very nasty job finding which were the right barrels. Knocking outside and calling only discovered
about six dwarves that could answer. They were unpacked and helped ashore where they sat or lay
muttering and moaning; they were so soaked and bruised and cramped that they could hardly yet
realize their release or be properly thankful for it. Dwalin and Balin were two of the most unhappy,
and it was no good asking them to help. Bifur and Bofur were less knocked about and drier, but they
lay down and would do nothing. Fili and Kili, however, who were young (for dwarves) and had also
been packed more neatly with plenty of straw into smaller casks, came out more or less smiling,
with only a bruise or two and a stiffness that soon wore off.
“I hope I never smell the smell of apples again!” said Fili. “My tub was full of it. To smell
apples everlastingly when you can scarcely move and are cold and sick with hunger is maddening. I
could eat anything in the wide world now, for hours on end-but not an apple!”
With the willing help of Fili and Kili, Thorin and Bilbo at last discovered the remainder of the
company and got them out. Poor fat Bombur was asleep or senseless; Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin and
Gloin were waterlogged and seemed only half alive; they all had to be carried one by one and laid
helpless on the shore.
“Well! Here we are!” said Thorin. “And I suppose we ought to thank our stars and Mr.
Baggins. I am sure he has a right to expect it, though I wish he could have arranged a more
comfortable journey. Still-all very much at your service once more, Mr. Baggins. No doubt we shall
feel properly grateful, when we are fed and recovered. In the meanwhile what next?” “I suggest
Lake-town,” said Bilbo, “What else is there?” Nothing else could, of course, be suggested; so
leaving the others Thorin and Fili and Kili and the hobbit went along the shore to the great bridge.
There were guards at the head of it, but they were not keeping very careful watch, for it was so long
since there had been any real need. Except for occasional squabbles about river-tolls they were
friends with the Wood-elves. Other folk were far away; and some of the younger people in the town
openly doubted the existence of any dragon in the mountain, and laughed at the greybeards and
gammers who said that they had seen him flying in the sky in their young days. That being so it is
not surprising that the guards were drinking and laughing by a fire in their hut, and did not hear the
noise of the unpacking of the dwarves or the footsteps of the four scouts. Their astonishment was
enormous when Thorin Oakenshield stepped in through the door.
“Who are you and what do you want?” they shouted leaping to their feet and gipping for
weapons.
“Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under the Mountain!” said the dwarf in a loud voice,
and he looked it, in spite of his torn clothes and draggled hood. The gold gleamed on his neck and
waist: his eyes were dark and deep. “I have come back. I wish to see the Master of your town!”
Then there was tremendous excitement. Some of the more foolish ran out of the hut as if they
expected the Mountain to go golden in the night and all the waters of the lake to turn yellow right
away. The captain of the guard came forward.
“And who are these?” he asked, pointing to Fili and: Kili and Bilbo. “The sons of my father’s
daughter,” answered Thorin, “Fili and Kili of the race of Durin, and Mr. Baggins who has travelled
with us out of the West.” “If you come in peace lay down your arms!” said the captain. “We have
none,” said Thorin, and it was true enough: their knives had been taken from them by the
wood-elves, and the great sword Orcrist too. Bilbo had his short sword, hidden as usual, but he said
nothing about that. “We have no need of weapons, who return at last to our own as spoken of old.
Nor could we fight against so many. Take us to your master!”“He is at feast,” said the captain.
“Then all the more reason for taking us to him,” burst in Fili, who was getting impatient at
these solemnities. “We are worn and famished after our long road and we have sick comrades. Now
make haste and let us have no more words, or your master may have something to say to you.”
“Follow me then,” said the captain, and with six men about them he led them over the bridge
through the gates and into the market-place of the town. This was a wide circle of quiet water
surrounded by the tall piles on which were built the greater houses, and by long wooden quays with
many steps and ladders going down to the surface of the lake. From one great hall shone many
lights and there came the sound of many voices. They passed its doors and stood blinking in the
light looking at long tables filled with folk. “I am Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under the
Mountain! I return!” cried Thorin in a loud voice from the door, before the captain could say
anything. All leaped to their feet. The Master of the town sprang from his great chair. But none rose
in greater surprise than the raft-men of the elves who were sitting at the lower end of the hall.
Pressing forward before the Master’s table they cried:
“These are prisoners of our king that have escaped, wandering vagabond dwarves that could
not give any good account of themselves, sneaking through the woods and molesting our people!”
“Is this true?” asked the Master. As a matter of fact he thought it far more likely than the
return of the King under the Mountain, if any such person had ever existed.
“It is true that we were wrongfully waylaid by the Elven-king and imprisoned without cause
as we journeyed back to our own land,” answered Thorin. “But lock nor bar may hinder the
homecoming spoken of old. Nor is this town in the Wood-elves’ realm. I speak to the Master of the
town of the Men of the lake, not to the raft-men of the king.”
Then the Master hesitated and looked from one to the other. The Elvenking was very powerful
in those parts and the Master wished for no enmity with him, nor did he think much of old songs,
giving his mind to.trade and tolls, to cargoes and gold, to which habit he owed his position. Others
were of different mind, however, and quickly the matter was settled without him. The news had
spread from the doors of the hall like fire through all the town. People were shouting inside the hall
and outside it. The quays were thronged with hurrying feet. Some began to sing snatches of old
songs concerning the return of the King under the Mountain; that it was Thror’s grandson not Thror
himself that had come back did not bother them at all. Others took up the song and it rolled loud
and high over the lake.
“The King beneath the mountains,
The King of carven stone,
The lord of silver fountains
Shall come into his own!
His crown shall be upholden,
His harp shall be restrung,
His halls shall echo golden
To songs of yore re-sung.
The woods shall wave on mountains
And grass beneath the sun;
His wealth shall flow in fountains
And the rivers golden run.
The streams shall run in gladness,
The lakes shall shine and burn,
And sorrow fail and sadness
At the Mountain-king’s return!”
So they sang, or very like that, only there was a great deal more of it, and there was much
shouting as well as the music of harps and of fiddles mixed up with it. Indeed such excitement had
not been known in the town in the memory of the oldest grandfather. The Wood-elves themselves
began to wonder greatly and even to be afraid. They did not know of course how Thorin had
escaped, and they began to think their king might have made a serious mistake. As for the Master hesaw there was nothing else for it but to obey the general clamour, for the moment at any rate, and to
pretend to believe that Thorin was what he said. So he gave up to him his own great chair and set
Fili and Kili beside him in places of honour. Even Bilbo was given a seat at the high table, and no
explanation of where he came in-no songs had alluded to him even in the obscurest way-was asked
for in the general bustle.
Soon afterwards the other dwarves were brought into the town amid scenes of astonishing
enthusiasm. They were all doctored and fed and housed and pampered in the most delightful and
satisfactory fashion. A large house was given up to Thorin and his company; boats and rowers were
put at their service; and crowds sat outside and sang songs all day, or cheered if any dwarf showed
so much as his nose.
Some of the songs were old ones; but some of them were quite new and spoke confidently of
the sudden death of the dragon and of cargoes of rich presents coming down the river to Lake-town.
These were inspired largely by the Master and they did not particularly please the dwarves, but in
the meantime they were well contented and they quickly grew fat and strong again. Indeed within a
week they were quite recovered, fitted out in fine cloth of their proper colours, with beards combed
and trimmed, and proud steps. Thorin looked and walked as if his kingdom was already regained
and Smaug chopped up into little pieces.
Then, as he had said, the dwarves’ good feeling towards the little hobbit grew stronger every
day. There were no more groans or grumbles. They drank his health, and they patted him on the
back, and they made a great fuss of him; which was just as well, for he was not feeling particularly
cheerful. He had not forgotten the look of the Mountain, nor the thought of the dragon, and he had
besides a shocking cold. For three days he sneezed and coughed, and he could not go out, and even
after that his speeches at banquets were limited to “Thag you very buch.”
In the meanwhile the Wood-elves had gone back up the Forest River with their cargoes, and
there was great excitement in the king’s palace. I have never heard what happened to the chief of
the guards and the butler. Nothing of course was ever said about keys or barrels while the dwarves
stayed in Lake-town, and Bilbo was careful never to become invisible. Still, I daresay, more was
guessed than was known, though doubtless Mr. Baggins remained a bit of a mystery. In any case the
king knew now the dwarves’ errand, or thought he did, and he said to himself:
“Very well! We’ll see! No treasure will come back through Mirkwood without my having
something to say in the matter. But I expect they will all come to a bad end, and serve them right!”
He at any rate did not believe in dwarves fighting and killing dragons like Smaug, and he strongly
suspected attempted burglary or something like it which shows he was a wise elf and wiser than the
men of the town, though not quite right, as we shall see in the end. He sent out his spies about the
shores of the lake and as far northward towards the Mountains as they would go, and waited. At the
end of a fortnight Thorin began to think of departure. While the enthusiasm still lasted in the town
was the time to get help. It would not do to let everything cool down with delay. So he spoke to the
Master and his councillors and said that soon he and his company must go on towards the
Mountain.
Then for the first time the Master was surprised and a little frightened; and he wondered if
Thorin was after all really a descendant of the old kings. He had never thought that the dwarves
would actually dare to approach Smaug, but believed they were frauds who would sooner or later be
discovered and be turned out. He was wrong. Thorin, of course, was really the grandson of the King
under the Mountain, and there is no knowing what a dwarf will not dare and do for revenge or the
recovery of his own. But the Master was not sorry at all to let them go. They were expensive to
keep, and their arrival had turned things into a long holiday in which business was at a standstill.
“Let them go and bother Smaug, and see how he welcomes them!” he thought. “Certainly, O Thorin
Thrain’s son Thror’s son!” was what he said. “You must claim your own. The hour is at hand,
spoken of old. What help we can offer shall be yours, and we trust to your gratitude when your
kingdom is regained.” So one day, although autumn was now getting far on, and winds were cold,
and leaves were falling fast, three large boats left Lake-town, laden with rowers, dwarves, Mr.
Baggins, and many provisions. Horses and ponies had been sent round by circuitous paths to meetthem at their appointed landing-place. The Master and his councillors bade them farewell from the
great steps of the town-hall that went down to the lake. People sang on the quays and out of
windows. The white oars dipped and splashed, and off they went north up the lake on the last stage
of their long journey. The only person thoroughly unhappy was Bilbo.
Chapter   
On the Doorstep
In two days going they rowed right up the Long Lake and passed out into the River Running,
and now they could all see the Lonely Mountain towering grim and tall before them. The stream
was strong and their going slow. At the; end of the third day, some miles up the river, they drew in
to the left or western bank and disembarked. Here they were joined by the horses with other
provisions and necessaries and the ponies for their own use that had been sent to meet them. They
packed what they could on the ponies and the rest was made into a store under a tent, but none of
the men of the town would stay with them even for the night so near the shadow of the Mountain.
“Not at any rate until the songs have come true!” said they. It was easier to believe in the Dragon
and less easy to believe in Thorin in these wild parts. Indeed their stores had no need of any guard,
for all the land was desolate and empty. So their escort left them, making off swiftly down the river
and the shoreward paths, although the night was already drawing on. They spent a cold and lonely
night and their spirits fell. The next day they set out again. Balin and Bilbo rode behind, each
leading another pony heavily laden beside him; the others were some way ahead picking out a slow
road, for there were no paths. They made north-west, slanting away from the River Running, and
drawing ever nearer and nearer to a great spur of the Mountain that was flung out southwards
towards them.
It was a weary journey, and a quiet and stealthy one. There was no laughter or song or sound
of harps, and the pride and hopes which had stirred in their hearts at the singing of old songs by the
lake died away to a plodding gloom. They knew that they were drawing near to the end of their
journey, and that it might be a very horrible end. The land about them grew bleak and barren,
though once, as Thorin told them, it had been green and fair. There was little grass, and before long
there was neither bush nor tree, and only broken and blackened stumps to speak of ones long
vanished. They were come to the Desolation of the Dragon, and they were come at the waning of
the year.
They reached the skirts of the Mountain all the same without meeting any danger or any sign
of the Dragon other than the wilderness he had made about his lair. The Mountain lay dark and
silent before them and ever higher above them. They made their first camp on the western side of
the great southern spur, which ended in a height called Ravenhill. On this there had been an old
watch-post; but they dared not climb it yet, it was too exposed. Before setting out to search the
western spurs of the Mountain for the hidden door, on which all their hopes rested, Thorin sent out a
scouting expedition to spy out the land to the South where the Front Gate stood. For this purpose he
chose Balin and Fili and Kili, and with them went Bilbo. They marched under the grey and silent
cliffs to the feet of Ravenhill. There the river, after winding a wide loop over the valley of Dale,
turned from the Mountain on its road to the Lake, flowing swift and noisily. Its bank was bare and
rocky, tall and steep above the stream; and gazing out from it over the narrow water, foaming and
splashing among many boulders, they could see in the wide valley shadowed by the Mountain’s
arms the grey ruins of ancient houses, towers, and walls.
“There lies all that is left of Dale,” said Balin. “The mountain’s sides were green with woods
and all the sheltered valley rich and pleasant in the days when the bells rang in that town.” He
looked both sad and grim as he said this: he had been one of Thorin’s companions on the day the
Dragon came. They did not dare to follow the river much further to. wards the Gate; but they went
on beyond the end of the southern spur, until lying hidden behind a rock they could look out and see
the dark cavernous opening in a great cliff-wall between the arms of the Mountain. Out of it the
waters of the Running River sprang; and out of it too there came a steam and a dark smoke. Nothingmoved in the waste, save the vapour and the water, and every now and again a black and ominous
crow. The only sound was the sound of the stony water, and every now and again the harsh croak of
a bird. Balin shuddered. “Let us return!” he said. “We can do no good here!– And I don’t like these
dark birds, they look like spies of evil.”
“The dragon is still alive and in the halls under the Mountain then-or I imagine so from the
smoke,” said the hobbit.
“That does not prove it,” said Balin, “though I don’t doubt you are right. But he might be
gone away some time, or he might be lying out on the mountain-side keeping watch, and still I
expect smokes and steams would come out of the gates: all the halls within must be filled with his
foul reek.” With such gloomy thoughts, followed ever by croaking crows above them, they made
their weary way back to the camp. Only in June they had been guests in the fair house of Elrond,
and though autumn was now crawling towards winter that pleasant time now seemed years ago.
They were alone in the perilous waste without hope of further help. They were at the end of their
journey, but as far as ever, it seemed, from the end of their quest. None of them had much spirit left.
Now strange to say Mr. Baggins had more than the others. He would often borrow Thorin’s
map and gaze at it, pondering over the runes and the message of the moon-letters Elrond had read. It
was he that made the dwarves begin the dangerous search on the western slopes for the secret door.
They moved their camp then to a long valley, narrower than the great dale in the South where the
Gates of the river stood, and walled with lower spurs of the Mountain. Two of these here thrust
forward west from the main mass in long steep-sided ridges that fell ever downwards towards the
plain. On this western side there were fewer signs of the dragon’s marauding feet, and there was
some grass for their ponies. From this western camp, shadowed all day by cliff and wall until the
sun began to sink towards the forest, day by day they toiled in parties searching for paths up the
mountain-side. If the map was true, somewhere high above the cliff at the valley’s head must stand
the secret door. Day by day they came back to their camp without success.
But at last unexpectedly they found what they were seeking. Fili and Kili and the hobbit went
back one day down the valley and scrambled among the tumbled rocks at its southern corner. About
midday, creeping behind a great stone that stood alone like a pillar, Bilbo came on what looked like
rough steps going upwards. Following these excitedly he and the dwarves found traces of a narrow
track, often lost, often rediscovered, that wandered on to the top of the southern ridge and brought
them at last to a still narrower ledge, which turned north across the face of the Mountain. Looking
down they saw that they were at the top of the cliff at the valley’s head and were gazing down on to
their own camp below. Silently, clinging to the rocky wall on their right, they went in single file
along the ledge, till the wall opened and they turned into a little steep-walled bay, grassy-floored,
still and quiet. Its entrance which they had found could not be seen from below because of the
overhang of the cliff, nor from further off because it was so small that it looked like a dark crack
and no more. It was not a cave and was open to the sky above; but at its inner end a flat wall rose up
that in the lower I part, close to the ground, was as smooth and upright as mason’s work, but
without a joint or crevice to be seen.
“No sign was there of post or lintel or threshold, nor any sign of bar or bolt or key-hole; yet
they did not doubt that they had found the door at last. They beat on it, they thrust and pushed at it,
they implored it to move, they spoke fragments of broken spells of opening, and nothing stirred. At
last tired out they. rested on the grass at its feet, and then at evening began, their long climb down.
There was excitement in the camp that night. In the morning they prepared to move once
more. Only Bofur and Bombur were left behind to guard the ponies and such stores as they had
brought with them from the river. The others went down the valley and up the newly found path,
and so to the narrow ledge. Along this they could carry no bundles or packs, so narrow and
breathless was it, with a fall of a hundred and fifty feet beside them on to sharp rocks below; but
each of them took a good coil of rope wound tight about his waist, and so at last without mishap
they reached the little grassy bay. There they made their third camp, hauling up what they needed
from below with their ropes. Down the same way they were able occasionally to lower one of the
more active dwarves, such as Kili, to exchange such news as there was, or to take a share in theguard below, while Bofur was hauled up to the higher camp. Bombur would not come up either the
rope or the path. “I am too fat for such fly-walks,” he said. “I should turn dizzy and tread on my
beard, and then you would be thirteen again. And the knotted ropes are too slender for my weight.”
Luckily for him that was not true, as you will see.
In the meanwhile some of them explored the ledge beyond the opening and found a path that
led higher and higher on to the mountain; but they did not dare to venture very far that way, nor was
there much use in it. Out up there a silence reigned, broken by no bird or sound except that of the
wind in the crannies of stone. They spoke low and never called or sang, for danger brooded in every
rock.
The others who were busy with the secret of the door had no more success.
They were too eager to trouble about the runes or the moon-letters, but tried without resting to
discover where exactly in the smooth face of the rock the door was hidden. They had brought picks
and tools of many sorts from Lake-town, and at first they tried to use these. But when they struck
the stone the handles splintered and jarred their arms cruelly, and the steel heads broke or bent like
lead. Mining work, they saw clearly was no good against the magic that had shut this door; and they
grew terrified, too, of the echoing noise. Bilbo found sitting on the doorstep lonesome and
wearisome-there was not a doorstep, of course, really, but they used to call the little grassy space
between the wall and the opening the “doorstep” in fun, remembering Bilbo’s words long ago at the
unexpected party in his hobbit-hole, when he said they could sit on the doorstep till they thought of
something. And sit and think they did, or wandered aimlessly about, and glummer and glummer
they became. Their spirits had risen a little at the discovery of the path, but now they sank into their
boots; and yet they would not give it up and go away. The hobbit was no longer much brighter than
the dwarves. He would do nothing but sit with his back to the rock-face and stare away west
through the opening, over the cliff, over the wide lands to the black wall of Mirkwood, and to the
distances beyond, in which he sometimes thought he could catch glimpses of the Misty Mountains
small and far. If the dwarves asked him what he was doing he answered:
“You said sitting on the doorstep and thinking would be my job, not to mention getting inside,
so I am sitting and thinking.” But I am afraid he was not thinking much of the job, but of what lay
beyond the blue distance, the quiet Western Land and the Hill and his hobbit-hole under it. A large
grey stone lay in the centre of the grass and he stared moodily at it or watched the great snails. They
seemed to love the little shut-in bay with its walls of cool rock, and there were many of them of
huge size crawling slowly and stickily along its sides.
“Tomorrow begins the last week of Autumn,” said Thorin one day.
“And winter comes after autumn,” said Bifur.
“And next year after that,” said Dwalin, “and our beards will grow till they hang down the
cliff to the valley before anything happens here. What is our burglar doing for us?
Since he has got an invisible ring, and ought to be a specially excellent performer now, I am
beginning to think he might go through the Front Gate and spy things out a bit!”
Bilbo heard this-the dwarves were on the rocks just : above the enclosure where he was
sitting-and “Good Gracious!” he thought, “so that is what they are beginning to think, is it? It is
always poor me that has to get them out : of their difficulties, at least since the wizard left.
Whatever am I going to do? I might have known that something dreadful would happen to me in the
end. I don’t think I could bear to see the unhappy valley of Dale again, and as for that steaming
gate! ! !”
That night he was very miserable and hardly slept. Next day the dwarves all went wandering
off in various directions; some were exercising the ponies down below, some were roving about the
mountain-side. All day Bilbo sat gloomily in the grassy bay gazing at the stone, or out west through
the narrow opening. He had a queer feeling that he was waiting for something. “Perhaps the wizard
will suddenly come back today,” he thought. If he lifted his head he could see a glimpse of the
distant forest. As the sun turned west there was a gleam of yellow upon its far roof, as if the light
caught the last pale leaves. Soon he saw the orange ball of the sun sinking towards the level of his
eyes. He went to the opening and there pale and faint was a thin new moon above the rim of Earth.At that very moment he heard a sharp crack behind him. There on the grey stone in the grass was an
enormous thrush, nearly coal black, its pale yellow breast freckled dark spots. Crack! It had caught
a snail and was knocking it on the stone. Crack! Crack!
Suddenly Bilbo understood. Forgetting all danger he stood on the ledge and hailed the
dwarves, shouting and paying. Those that were nearest came tumbling over the rocks and as fast as
they could along the ledge to him, wondering what on earth was the matter; the others shouted to be
hauled up the ropes (except Bombur, of course: he was asleep).
Quickly Bilbo explained. They all fell silent: the hobbit standing by the grey stone, and the
dwarves with wagging beards watching impatiently. The sun sank lower and lower, and their hopes
fell. It sank into a belt of reddened cloud and disappeared. The dwarves groaned, but still Bilbo
stood almost without moving. The little moon was dipping to the horizon. Evening was coming on.
Then suddenly when their hope was lowest a red ray of the sun escaped like a finger through a rent
in the cloud. A gleam of light came straight through the opening into the bay and fell on the smooth
rock-face. The old thrush, who had been watching from a high perch with beady eyes and head
cocked on one side, gave a sudden trill. There was a loud attack. A flake of rock split from the wall
and fell. A hole appeared suddenly about three feet from the ground. Quickly, trembling lest the
chance should fade, the dwarves rushed to the rock and pushed-in vain.
“The key! The key!” cried Bilbo. “Where is Thorin?”
Thorin hurried up.
“The key!” shouted Bilbo. “The key that went with the map! Try it now while there is still
time!”
Then Thorin stepped up and drew the key on its chain from round his neck. He put it to the
hole. It fitted and it turned! Snap! The gleam went out, the sun sank, the moon was gone, and
evening sprang into the sky. Now they all pushed together, and slowly a part of the rock-wall gave
way. Long straight cracks appeared and widened. A door five feet high and three broad was out–
lined, and slowly without a sound swung inwards. It seemed as if darkness flowed out like a vapour
from the hole in the mountain-side, and deep darkness in which nothing could be seen lay before
their eyes mouth leading in and down.
Chapter   
Inside Information
For a long time the dwarves stood in the dark before the door and debated, until at last Thorin
spoke:
“Now is the time for our esteemed Mr. Baggins, who has proved himself a good companion
on our long road, and a hobbit full of courage and resource far exceeding his size, and if I may say
so possessed of good luck far exceeding the usual allowance-now is the time for him to perform the
service for which he was included in our Company; now is the time for him to earn his Reward.”
You are familiar with Thorin’s style on important occasions, so I will not give you any more of it,
though he went on a good deal longer than this. It certainly was an important occasion, but Bilbo
felt impatient. By now he was quite familiar with Thorin too, and he knew what be was driving at.
“If you mean you think it is my job to go into the secret passage first, O Thorin Thrain’s son
Oakenshield, may your beard grow ever longer,” he said crossly, “say so at once and have done! I
might refuse. I have got you out of two messes already, which were hardly in the original bargain,
so that I am, I think, already owed some reward. But ‘third time pays for all’ as my father used to
say, and somehow I don’t think I shall refuse. Perhaps I have begun to trust my luck more than I
used to in the old days” – he meant last spring before he left his own house, but it seemed centuries
ago – “but anyway I think I will go and have a peep at once and get it over. Now who is coming
with me?”
He did not expect a chorus of volunteers, so he was not disappointed. Fili and Kili looked
uncomfortable and stood on One leg, but the others made no pretence of offering – except old
Balin. the look-out man, who was rather fond the hobbit. He said he would come inside at least andperhaps a bit of the way too, really to call for help if necessary.
The most that can be said for the dwarves is this: they intended to pay Bilbo really
handsomely for his services; they had brought him to do a nasty job for them, and they did not mind
the poor little fellow doing it if he would; but they would all have done their best to get him out of
trouble, if he got into it, as they did in the case of the trolls at the beginning of their adventures
before they had any particular reasons for being grateful to him. There it is: dwarves are not heroes,
but calculating folk with a great idea of the value of money; some are tricky and treacherous and
pretty bad lots; some are not, but are decent enough people like Thorin and Company, if you don’t
expect too much.
The stars were coming out behind him in a pale sky barred with black when the hobbit crept
through the enchanted door and stole into the Mountain. It was far easier going than he expected.
This was no goblin entrance, or rough wood-elves’ cave. It was a passage made by dwarves, at the
height of their wealth and skill: straight as a ruler, smooth-floored and smooth-sided, going with a
gentle never-varying slope direct-to some distant end in the blackness below.
After a while Balin bade Bilbo “Good luck!” and stopped where he could still see the faint
outline of the door, and by a trick of, the echoes of the tunnel hear the rustle of the whispering
voices of the others just outside. Then the hobbit slipped on his ring, and warned by the echoes to
take more than hobbit’s care to make no sound, he crept noiselessly down, down, down into the
dark. He was trembling with fear, but his little face was set and grim. Already he was a very
different hobbit from the one that had run out without a pocket-handkerchief from Bag-End long
ago. He had not had a pocket-handkerchief for ages. He loosened his dagger in its sheath, tightened
his belt, and went on.
“Now you are in for it at last, Bilbo Baggins,” he said to himself. “You went and put your foot
right in it that night of the party, and now you have got to pull it out and pay for it! Dear me, what a
fool I was and am!” said the least Tookish part of him. “I have absolutely no use for dragon-guarded
treasures, and the whole lot could stay here for ever, if only I could wake up and find this beastly
tunnel was my own front-hall at home!” He did not wake up of course, but went still on and on, till
all sign of the door behind had faded away. He was altogether alone. Soon he thought it was
beginning to feel warm. “Is that a kind of a glow I seem to see coming right ahead down there?” he
thought. It was. As he went forward it grew and grew, till there was no doubt about it. It was a red
light steadily getting redder and redder. Also it was now undoubtedly hot in the tunnel. Wisps of
vapour floated up and past him and he began to sweat. A sound, too, began to throb in his ears, a
sort of bubbling like the noise of a large pot galloping on the fire, mixed with a rumble as of a
gigantic tom-cat purring. This grew to the unmistakable gurgling noise of some vast animal snoring
in its sleep down there in the red glow in front of him.
It was at this point that Bilbo stopped. Going on from there was the bravest thing he ever did.
The tremendous things that happened afterward were as nothing compared to it. He fought the real
battle in the tunnel alone, before he ever saw the vast danger that lay in wait. At any rate after a
short halt go on he did; and you can picture him coming to the end of the tunnel, an opening of
much the same size and shape as the door above. Through it peeps the hobbit’s little head. Before
him lies the great bottommost cellar or dungeon-hall of the ancient dwarves right at the Mountain’s
root. It is almost dark so that its vastaess can only be dimly guessed, but rising from the near side of
the rocky floor there is a great glow. The glow of Smaug! There he lay, a vast red-golden dragon,
fast asleep; thrumming came from his jaws and nostrils, and wisps of smoke, but his fires were low
in slumber.
Beneath him, under all his limbs and his huge coiled tail, and about him on all sides stretching
away across the unseen floors, lay countless piles of precious things, gold wrought and unwrought,
gems and jewels, and silver red-stained in the ruddy light.
Smaug lay, with wings folded like an immeasurable bat, turned partly on one side, so that the
hobbit could see his underparts and his long pale belly crusted with gems and fragments of gold
from his long lying on his costly bed. Behind him where the walls were nearest could dimly be seen
coats of mail, helms and axes, swords and spears hanging; and there in rows stood great jars andvessels filled with a wealth that could not be guessed. To say that Bilbo’s breath was taken away is
no description at all. There are no words left to express his staggerment, since Men changed the
language that they learned of elves in the days when all the world was wonderful. Bilbo had heard
tell and sing of dragon-hoards before, but the splendour, the lust, the glory of such treasure had
never yet come home to him. His heart was filled and pierced with enchantment and with the desire
of dwarves; and he gazed motionless, almost forgetting the frightful guardian, at the gold beyond
price and count.
He gazed for what seemed an age, before drawn almost against his will, he stole from the
shadow of the doorway, across the floor to the nearest edge of the mounds of treasure. Above him
the sleeping dragon lay, a dire menace even in his sleep. He grasped a great two-handled cup, as
heavy as he could carry, and cast one fearful eye upwards. Smaug stirred a wing, opened a claw, the
rumble of his snoring changed its note.
Then Bilbo fled. But the dragon did not wake-not yet but shifted into other dreams of greed
and violence, lying there in his stolen hall while the little hobbit toiled back up the long tunnel. His
heart was beating and a more fevered shaking was in his legs than when he was going down, but
still he clutched the cup, and his chief thought was: “I’ve done it! This will show them. ‘More like a
grocer than a burglar’ indeed! Well, we’ll hear no more of that.”
Nor did he. Balin was overjoyed to see the hobbit again, and as delighted as he was surprised.
He picked Bilbo up and carried him out into the open air. It was midnight and clouds had covered
the stars, but Bilbo lay with his eyes shut, gasping and taking pleasure in the feel of the fresh air
again, and hardly noticing the excitement of the dwarves, or how they praised him and patted him
on the back and put themselves and all their families for generations to come at his service.
The dwarves were still passing the cup from hand to hand and talking delightedly of the
recovery of their treasure, when suddenly a vast rumbling woke in the mountain underneath as if it
was an old volcano that had made up its mind to start eruptions once again. The door behind them
was pulled nearly to, and blocked from closing with a stone, but up the long tunnel came the
dreadful echoes, from far down in the depths, of a bellowing and a trampling that made the ground
beneath them tremble.
Then the dwarves forgot their joy and their confident boasts of a moment before and cowered
down in fright. Smaug was still to be reckoned with. It does not do to leave a live dragon out of
your calculations, if you live near him. Dragons may not have much real use for all their wealth, but
they know it to an ounce as a rule, especially after long possession; and Smaug was no exception.
He had passed from an uneasy dream (in which a warrior, altogether insignificant in size but
provided with a bitter sword and great courage, figured most unpleasantly) to a doze, and from a
doze to wide waking. There was a breath of strange air in his cave. Could there be a draught from
that little hole? He had never felt quite happy about it, though was so small, and now he glared at it
in suspicion an wondered why he had never blocked it up. Of late he had half fancied he had caught
the dim echoes of a knocking sound from far above that came down through it to his lair. He stirred
and stretched forth his neck to sniff. Then he missed the cup!
Thieves! Fire! Murder! Such a thing had not happened since first he came to the Mountain!
His rage passes description – the sort of rage that is only seen when rich folk that have more than
they can enjoy suddenly lose something that they have long had but have never before used or
wanted. His fire belched forth, the hall smoked, he shook the mountain-roots. He thrust his head in
vain at the little hole, and then coiling his length together, roaring like thunder underground, he sped
from his deep lair through its great door, out into the huge passages of the mountain-palace and up
towards the Front Gate. To hunt the whole mountain till he had caught the thief and had torn and
trampled him was his one thought. He issued from the Gate, the waters rose in fierce whistling
steam, and up he soared blazing into the air and settled on the mountain-top in a spout of green and
scarlet flame. The dwarves heard the awful rumour of his flight, and they crouched against the walls
of the grassy terrace cringing under boulders, hoping somehow to escape the frightful eyes of the
hunting dragon.
There they would have all been killed, if it had not been for Bilbo once again. “Quick!Quick!” he gasped. “The door! The tunnel! It’s no good here.” Roused by these words they were
just about to creep inside the tunnel when Bifur gave a cry: “My cousins! Bombur and Bofur – we
have forgotten them, they are down in the valley!”
“They will be slain, and all our ponies too, and all out stores lost,” moaned the others. “We
can do nothing.”
“Nonsense!” said Thorin, recovering his dignity. “We cannot leave them. Get inside Mr.
Baggins and Balin, and you two Fili and Kili-the dragon shan’t have all of us. Now you others,
where are the ropes? Be quick!” Those were perhaps the worst moments they had been through yet.
The horrible sounds of Smaug’s anger were echoing in the stony hollows far above; at any moment
he might come blazing down or fly whirling round and find them there, near the perilous cliff’s
edge hauling madly on the ropes. Up came Bofur, and still all was safe. Up came Bombur, puffing
and blowing while the ropes creaked, and still all was safe. Up came some tools and bundles of
stores, and then danger was upon them. A whirring noise was heard. A red light touched the points
of standing rocks. The dragon came. They had barely time to fly back to the tunnel, pulling and
dragging in their bundles, when Smaug came hurtling from the North, licking the mountain-sides
with flame, beating his great wings with a noise like a roaring wind. His hot breath shrivelled the
grass before the door, and drove in through the crack they had left and scorched them as they lay
hid. Flickering fires leaped up and black rock-shadows danced. Then darkness fell as he passed
again. The ponies screamed with terror, burst their ropes and galloped wildly off. The dragon
swooped and turned to pursue them, and was gone. “That’ll be the end of our poor beasts!” said
Thorin.
“Nothing can escape Smaug once he sees it. Here we are and here we shall have to stay,
unless any one fancies tramping the long open miles back to the river with Smaug on the watch!”
It was not a pleasant thought! They crept further down the tunnel, and there they lay and
shivered though it was warm and stuffy, until dawn came pale through the crack of the door. Every
now and again through the night they could hear the roar of the flying dragon grow and then pass
and fade, as he hunted round and round the mountain-sides.
He guessed from the ponies, and from the traces of the camps he had discovered, that men had
come up from the river and the lake and had scaled the mountain-side from the valley where the
ponies had been standing; but the door withstood his searching eye, and the little high-walled bay
had kept out his fiercest flames. Long he had hunted in vain till the dawn chilled his wrath and he
went back to his golden couch to sleep – and to gather new strength.
He would not forget or forgive the theft, not if a thousand years turned him to smouldering
stone, but he could afford to wait. Slow and silent he crept back to his lair and half closed his eyes.
When morning came the terror of the dwarves grew less. They realized that dangers of this
kind were inevitable in dealing with such a guardian, and that it was no good giving up their quest
yet. Nor could they get away just now, as Thorin had pointed out. Their ponies were lost or killed,
and they would have to wait some time before Smaug relaxed his watch sufficiently for them to
dare the long way on foot. Luckily they had saved enough of their stores to last them still for some
time.
They debated long on what was to be done, but they could think of no way of getting rid of
Smaug – which had always been a weak point in their plans, as Bilbo felt inclined to point out.
Then as is the nature of folk that are thoroughly perplexed, they began to grumble at the hobbit,
blaming him for what had at first so pleased them: for bringing away a cup and stirring up Smaug’s
wrath so soon.
“What else do you suppose a burglar is to do?” asked Bilbo angrily. “I was not engaged to kill
dragons, that is warrior’s work, but to steal treasure. I made the best beginning I could. Did you
expect me to trot back with the whole hoard of Thror on my back? If there is any grumbling to be
done, I think I might have a say. You ought to have brought five hundred burglars not one. I am sure
it reflects great credit on your grandfather, but you cannot pretend that you ever made the vast
extent of his wealth clear to me. I should want hundreds of years to bring it all up, if I was fifty
times as big, and Smaug as tame as a rabbit.”After that of course the dwarves begged his pardon.
“What then do you propose we should do, Mr. Baggins?” asked Thorin politely.
“I have no idea at the moment – if you mean about removing the treasure. That obviously
depends entirely on some new turn of luck and the getting rid of Smaug.
Getting rid of dragons is not at all in my line, but I will do my best to think about it.
Personally I have no hopes at all, and wish I was safe back at home.”
“Never mind that for the moment! What are we to do now, to-day?” “Well, if you really want
my advice, I should say we can do nothing but stay where we are. By day we can no doubt creep
out safely enough to take the air. Perhaps before long one or two could be chosen to go back to the
store by the river and replenish our supplies. But in the meanwhile everyone ought to be well inside
the tunnel by night.
“Now I will make you an offer. I have got my ring and will creep down this very noon -then if
ever Smaug ought to be napping-and see what he is up to. Perhaps something will turn up. ‘Every
worm has his weak spot,’ as my father used to say, though I am sure it was not from personal
experience.” Naturally the dwarves accepted the offer eagerly. Already they had come to respect
little Bilbo. Now he had become the real leader in their adventure. He had begun to have ideas and
plans of his own. When midday came he got ready for another journey down into the Mountain. He
did not like it of course, but it was not so bad now he knew, more or less, what was in front of him.
Had he known more about dragons and their wily ways, he might have teen more frightened and
less hopeful of catching this one napping. The sun was shining when he started, but it was as dark
as night in the tunnel. The light from the door, almost closed, soon faded as he went down. So silent
was his going that smoke on a gentle wind could hardly have surpasses it, and he was inclined to
feel a bit proud of himself as he drew near the lower door. There was only the very fainter glow to
be seen. “Old Smaug is weary and asleep,” he thought. “He can’t, see me and he won’t hear me.
Cheer up Bilbo!” He had forgotten or had never heard about dragons’ sense of smell.
It is also an awkward fact that they keep half an eye open watching while they sleep, if they
are suspicious. Smaug certainly looked fast asleep, almost dead and dark, with scarcely a snore
more than a whiff of unseen steam, when Bilbo peeped once more from the entrance. He was just
about to step out on to the floor when he caught a sudden thin and piercing ray of red from under
the drooping lid. of Smaug’s left eye. He was only pretending to sleep! He was watching the tunnel
entrance! Hurriedly Bilbo stepped back and blessed the luck of his ring. Then Smaug spoke.
“Well, thief! I smell you and I feel your air. I hear your breath. Come along! Help yourself
again, there is plenty and to spare!” But Bilbo was not quite so unlearned in dragon-lore as all that,
and if Smaug hoped to get him to come nearer so easily he was disappointed. “No thank you, O
Smaug the. Tremendous!” he replied. “I did not come for presents. I only wished to have a look at
you and see if you were truly as great as tales say. I did not believe them.”
“Do you now?” said the dragon somewhat flattered, even though he did not believe a word of
it. j “Truly songs and tales fall utterly short of the reality, O Smaug the Chiefest and Greatest of
Calamities,” replied Bilbo.
You have nice manners for a thief and a liar,” said the dragon. “You seem familiar with my
name, but I don’t seem to remember smelling you before. Who are you and where do you come
from, may I ask?”
“You may indeed! I come from under the hill, and under hills and over the hills my paths led.
And through the air, I am he that walks unseen.” “So I can well believe,” said Smaug, “but that is
hardly our usual name.” “I am the clue-finder, the web-cutter, the stinging fly. I as chosen for the
lucky number.”
“Lovely titles!” sneered the dragon. “But lucky numbers don’t always come off.”
“I am he that buries his friends alive and drowns them and draws them alive again from the
water. I came from the end of a bag, but no bag went over me.”
“These don’t sound so creditable,” scoffed Smaug.
“I am the friend of bears and the guest of eagles. I am Ringwinner and Luckwearer; and I am
Barrel-rider,” went on Bilbo beginning to be pleased with his riddling.“That’s better!” said Smaug. “But don’t let your imagination run away with you!”
This of course is the way to talk to dragons, if you don’t want to reveal your proper name
(which is wise), and don’t want to infuriate them by a flat refusal (which is also very wise). No
dragon can resist the fascination of riddling talk and of wasting time trying to understand it. There
was a lot here which Smaug did not understand at all (though I expect you do, since you know all
about Bilbo’s adventures to which he was referring), but he thought he understood enough, and he
chuckled in his wicked inside. “I thought so last night,” he smiled to himself. “Lake-men, some
nasty scheme of those miserable tub-trading Lake-men, or I’m a lizard. I haven’t been down that
way for an age and an age; but I will soon alter that!” “Very well, O Barrel-rider!” he said aloud.
“Maybe Barrel was your pony’s name; and maybe not, though it was fat enough. You may walk
unseen, but you did not walk all the way. Let me tell you I ate six ponies last night and I shall catch
and eat all the others before long. In return for the excellent meal I will give you one piece of advice
for your good: don’t have more to do with dwarves than you can help!”
“Dwarves!” said Bilbo in pretended surprise.
“Don’t talk to me!” said Smaug. “I know the smell (and taste) of dwarf-no one better. Don’t
tell me that I can eat a dwarf-ridden pony and not know it! You’ll come to a bad end, if you go with
such friends. Thief Barrel-rider. I don’t mind if you go back and tell them so from me.”
But he did not tell Bilbo that there was one smell he could not make out at all, hobbit-smell; it
was quite outside his experience and puzzled him mightily.
“I suppose you got a fair price for that cup last night?” he went on. “Come now, did you?
Nothing at all! Well, that’s just like them. And I suppose they are skulking outside, and your job is
to do all the dangerous work and get what you can when I’m not looking-for them? And you will
get a fair share? Don’t you believe it! If you get off alive, you will be lucky.” Bilbo was now
beginning to feel really uncomfortable. Whenever Smaug’s roving eye, seeking for him in the
shadows, flashed across him, he trembled, and an unaccountable desire seized hold of him to rush
out and reveal himself and tell all the truth to Smaug. In fact he was in grievous danger of coming
under the dragon-spell. But plucking up courage he spoke again. “You don’t know everything, O
Smaug the Mighty,” said he. “Not gold alone brought us hither.”
“Ha! Ha! You admit the ‘us’,” laughed Smaug. “Why not say ‘us fourteen’ and be done with
it. Mr. Lucky Number? I am pleased to hear that you had other business in these parts besides my
gold. In that case you may, perhaps, not altogether waste your time.
“I don’t know if it has occurred to you that, even if you could steal the gold bit by bit-a matter
of a hundred years or so – you could not get it very far? Not much use on the mountain -side? Not
much use in the forest? Bless me! Had you never thought of the catch? A fourteenth share, I
suppose, Or something like it, those were the terms, eh? But what about delivery? What about
cartage? What about armed guards and tolls?” And Smaug laughed aloud. He had a wicked and a
wily heart, and he knew his guesses were not far out, though he suspected that the Lake-men were
at the back of the plans, and that most of the plunder was meant to stop there in the town by the
shore that in his young days had been called Esgaroth.
You will hardly believe it, but poor Bilbo was really very taken aback. So far all his. thoughts
and energies had been concentrated on getting to the Mountain and finding the entrance. He had
never bothered to wonder how the treasure was to be removed, certainly never how any part of it
that might fall to his share was to be brought back all the way to Bag-End Under-Hill. Now a nasty
suspicion began to grow in his mind-had the dwarves forgotten this important point too, or were
they laughing in their sleeves at him all the time? That is the effect that dragon-talk has on the
inexperienced. Bilbo of course ought to have been on his guard; but Smaug had rather an
overwhelming personality.
“I tell you,” he said, in an effort to remain loyal to his friends and to keep his end up, “that
gold was only an afterthought with us. We came over hill and under hill, by wave and win, for
“Revenge”. Surely, O Smaug the unassessably wealthy, you must realize that your success has made
you some bitter enemies?”
Then Smaug really did laugh-a devastating sound which shook Bilbo to the floor, while far upin the tunnel the dwarves huddled together and imagined that the hobbit had come to a sudden and a
nasty end. “Revenge!” he snorted, and the light of his eyes lit the the hall from floor to ceiling like
scarlet lightning. “Revenge! The King under the Mountain is dead and where are hi kin that dare
seek revenge? Girion Lord of Dale is dead, and I have eaten his people like a wolf among sheep,
and where are his sons’ sons that dare approach me? I kill where I wish and none dare resist. I laid
low the warriors of old and their like is not in the world today. Then I was but young and tender.
Now I am old and strong, strong strong. Thief in the Shadows!” he gloated. “My armour is like
tenfold shields, my teeth are swords, my claws spears, the shock of my tail a thunderbolt, my wings
a hurricane, and my breath death!”
“I have always understood,” said Bilbo in a frightened squeak, “that dragons were softer
underneath, especially in the region of the-er-chest; but doubtless one so fortified has thought of
that.”
The dragon stopped short in his boasting. “Your information is antiquated,” he snapped. “I am
armoured above and below with iron scales and hard gems. No blade can pierce me.”
“I might have guessed it,” said Bilbo. “Truly there can; nowhere be found the equal of Lord
Smaug the Impenetrable. What magnificence to possess a waistcoat of fine diamonds!”
“Yes, it is rare and wonderful, indeed,” said Smaug absurdly pleased. He did not know that
the hobbit had already caught a glimpse of his peculiar under-covering on his previous visit, and
was itching for a closer view for reasons of his own. The dragon rolled over. “Look!” he said.
“What do you say to that?”
“Dazzlingly marvellous! Perfect! Flawless! Staggering!” exclaimed Bilbo aloud, but what he
thought inside was: “Old fool! Why there is a large patch in the hollow of his left breast as bare as a
snail out of its shell!” After he had seen that Mr. Baggins’ one idea was to get away. “Well, I really
must not detain Your Magnificence any longer,” he said, “or keep you from much needed rest.
Ponies take some catching, I believe, after a long start. And so do burglars,” he added as a parting
shot, as he darted back and fled up the tunnel.
It was an unfortunate remark, for the dragon spouted terrific flames after him, and fast though
he sped up the slope, he had not gone nearly far enough to be comfortable before the ghastly head
of Smaug was thrust against the opening behind. Luckily the whole head and jaws could not
squeeze in, but the nostrils sent forth fire and vapour to pursue him, and he was nearly overcome,
and stumbled blindly on in great pain and fear. He had been feeling rather pleased with the
cleverness of his conversation with Smaug, but his mistake at the end shook him into better sense.
“Never laugh at live dragons, Bilbo you fool!” he said to himself, and it became a favourite
saying of his later, and passed into a proverb. “You aren’t nearly through this adventure yet,” he
added, and that was pretty true as well.
The afternoon was turning into evening when he came out again and stumbled and fell in a
faint on the ‘door-step.’ The dwarves revived him, and doctored his scorches as well as they could;
but it was a long time before the hair on the back of his head and his heels grew properly again: it
had all been singed and frizzled right down to the skin. In the meanwhile his friends did their best to
cheer him up; and they were eager for his story, especially wanting to know why the dragon had
made such an awful noise, and how Bilbo had escaped.
But the hobbit was worried and uncomfortable, and they had difficulty in getting anything out
of him. On thinking things over he was now regretting some of the things he had said to the dragon,
and was not eager to repeat them. The old thrush was sitting on a rock near by with his head cocked
on one side, listening to all that was said. It shows what an ill temper Bilbo was in: he picked up a
stone and threw it at the thrush, which merely fluttered aside and came back.
“Drat the bird!” said Bilbo crossly. “I believe he is listening, and I don’t like the look of him.”
“Leave him alone!” said Thorin. “The thrushes are good and friendly-this is a very old bird
indeed, and is maybe the last left of the ancient breed that used to live about here, tame to the hands
of my father and grandfather. They were a long-lived and magical race, and this might even be one
of those that were alive then, a couple of hundreds years or more ago. The Men of Dale used to
have the trick of understanding their language, and used them for messengers to fly to the Men ofthe Lake and elsewhere.” “Well, he’ll have news to take to Lake-town all right, if that is what he is
after,” said Bilbo; “though I don’t suppose there are any people left there that trouble with
thrush-language.”
“Why what has happened?” cried the dwarves. “Do get on with your tale!”
So Bilbo told them all he could remember, and he confessed that he had a nasty feeling that
the dragon guessed too much from his riddles added to the camps and the ponies. “I am sure he
knows we came from Lake-town and had help from there; and I have a horrible feeling that his next
move may be in that direction. I wish to goodness I had never said that about Barrel-rider; it would
make even a blind rabbit in these parts think of the Lake-men.” “Well, well! It cannot be helped,
and it is difficult not to slip in talking to a dragon, or so I have always heard,” said Balin anxious to
comfort him. “I think you did very well, if you ask me-you found out one very useful thing at any
rate, and got home alive, and that is more than most can say who have had words with the likes of
Smaug. It may be a mercy and a blessing yet to know of the bare patch in the old Worm’s diamond
waistcoat.” That turned the conversation, and they all began discussing dragon-slayings historical,
dubious, and mythical, and the various sorts of stabs and jabs and undercuts, and the different arts,
devices and stratagems by which they had been accomplished. The general opinion was that
catching a dragon napping was not as easy as it sounded, and the attempt to stick one or prod one
asleep was more likely to end in disaster than a bold frontal attack. All the while they talked the
thrush listened, till at last when the stars began to peep forth, it silently spread its wings and flew
away. And all the while they talked and the shadows lengthened Bilbo became more and more
unhappy and his foreboding At last he interrupted them. “I am sure we are very unsafe here,” he
said, “and I don’t see the point of sitting here. The dragon has withered all the pleasant green, and
anyway the night has come and it is cold. But I feel it in my bones that this place will be attacked
again. Smaug knows now how I came down to his hall, and you can trust him to guess where the
other end of the tunnel is. He will break all this side of the Mountain to bits, if necessary, to stop up
our entrance, and if we are smashed with it the better he will like it.”
“You are very gloomy, Mr. Baggins!” said Thorin. “Why has not Smaug blocked the lower
end, then, if he is so eager to keep us out? He has not, or we should have heard him.”
“I don’t know, I don’t know-because at first he wanted to try and lure me in again, I suppose,
and now perhaps because he is waiting till after tonight’s hunt, or because he does not want to
damage his bedroom if he can help it – but I wish you would not argue. Smaug will be coming out
at any minute now, and our only hope is to get well in the tunnel and shut the door.” He seemed so
much in earnest that the dwarves at last did as he said, though they delayed shutting the door-it
seemed a desperate plan, for no one knew whether or how they could get it open again from the
inside, and the thought of being shut in a place from which the only way out led through the
dragon’s lair was not one they liked. Also everything seemed quite quiet, both outside and down the
tunnel. So for a longish while they sat inside not far down from the half-open door and went on
talking. The talk turned to the dragon’s wicked words about the dwarves. Bilbo wished he had never
heard them, or at least that he could feel quite certain that the dwarves now were absolutely honest
when they declared that they had never thought at all about what would happen after the treasure
had been won. “We knew it would be a desperate venture,” said Thorin, “and we know that still;
and I still think that when we have won it will be time enough to think what to do about it. As for
your share, Mr. Baggins, I assure you we are more than grateful and you shall choose you own
fourteenth, as soon as we have anything to divide, am sorry if you are worried about transport, and I
admit the difficulties are great-the lands have not become less wild with the passing of time, rather
the reverse-but we will do whatever we can for you, and take our share of the cost when the time
comes. Believe me or not as you like!”
From that the talk turned to the great hoard itself and to the things that Thorin and Balin
remembered. They wondered if they were still lying there.unharmed in the hall below: the spears
that were made for the armies of the great King Bladorthin (long since dead), each had a
thrice-forged head and their shafts were inlaid with cunning gold, but they were never delivered or
paid for; shields made for warriors long dead; the great golden cup of Thror, two-handed,hammered and carven with birds and flowers whose eyes and petals were of jewels; coats of mail
gilded and silvered and impenetrable; the necklace of Girion, Lord of Dale, made of five hundred
emeralds green as grass, which he gave for the arming of his eldest son in a coat of dwarf-linked
rings the like of which had never been made before, for it was wrought of pure silver to the power
and strength of triple steel. But fairest of all was the great white gem, which the dwarves had found
beneath the roots of the Mountain, the Heart of the Mountain, the Arkenstone of Thrain. “The
Arkenstone! The Arkenstone!” murmured Thorin in the dark, half dreaming with his chin upon his
knees. “It was like a globe with a thousand facets; it shone like silver in the firelight, like water in
the sun, like snow under the stars, like rain upon the Moon!”
But the enchanted desire of the hoard had fallen from Bilbo. All through their talk he was only
half listening to them. He sat nearest to the door with one ear cocked for any beginnings of a sound
without, his other was alert or echoes beyond the murmurs of the dwarves, for any whisper of a
movement from far below.
Darkness grew deeper and he grew ever more uneasy. “Shut the door!” he begged them. “I
fear that dragon in my marrow. I like this silence far less than the uproar of last night. Shut the door
before it is too late!” Something in his voice gave the dwarves an uncomfortable feeling. Slowly
Thorin shook off his dreams and getting up he kicked away the stone that wedged the door. Then
they thrust upon it, and it closed with a snap and a clang. No trace of a keyhole was there left on the
inside. They were shut in the Mountain!
And not a moment too soon. They had hardly gone any distance down the tunnel when a blow
smote the side of the Mountain like the crash of battering-rams made of forest oaks and swung by
giants. The rock boomed, the walls cracked and stones fell from the roof on their heads. What
would have happened if the door had still been open I don’t like to think. They fled further down
the tunnel glad to be still alive, while behind them outside they heard the roar and rumble of
Smaug’s fury. He was breaking rocks to pieces, smashing wall and cliff with the lashings of his
huge tail, till their little lofty camping ground, the scorched grass, the thrush’s stone, the
snail-covered walls, the narrow ledge, and all disappeared in a jumble of smithereens, and an
avalanche of splintered stones fell over the cliff into the valley below. Smaug had left his lair in
silent stealth, quietly soared into the air, and then floated heavy and slow in the dark like a
monstrous crow, down the wind towards the west of the Mountain, in the hopes of catching
unawares something or somebody there, and of spying the outlet to the passage which the thief had
used. This was the outburst of his wrath when he could find nobody and see nothing, even where he
guessed the outlet must actually be. After he had let off his rage in this way he felt better and he
thought in his heart that he would not be troubled again from that direction. In-the meanwhile he
had further vengeance to take. “Barrel-rider!” he snorted. “Your fee came from the waterside and up
the water you came with out a doubt. I don’t know your smell, but if you are not one of those men
of the Lake, you had their help. They shall see me and remember who is the real King under the
Mountain!”
He rose in fire and went away south towards the Running River.
Chapter   
Not at Home
In the meanwhile, the dwarves sat in darkness, and utter silence fell about them. Little they ate
and little they spoke. They could not count the passing of time; and they scarcely dared to move, for
the whisper of their voices echoed and rustled in the tunnel. If they dozed, they woke still to
darkness and to silence going on unbroken. At last after days and days of waiting, as it seemed,
when they were becoming choked and dazed for want of air, they could bear it no longer. They
would almost have welcomed sounds from below of the dragon’s return. In the silence they feared
some cunning devilry of his, but they could not sit there for ever.
Thorin spoke: “Let us try the door!” he said. “I must feel the wind on my face soon or die. I
think I would rather be smashed by Smaug in the open than suffocate in here!”So several of the dwarves got up and groped back to where the door had been. But they found
that the upper end of the tunnel had been shattered and blocked with broken rock. Neither key nor
the magic it had once obeyed would ever open that door again.
“We are trapped!” they groaned. “This is the end. We shall die here.” But somehow, just when
the dwarves were most despairing, Bilbo felt a strange lightening of the heart, as if a heavy weight
had gone from under his waistcoat.
“Come, come!” he said. “While there’s life there’s hope!” as my father used to say, and ‘Third
time pays for all.’ I am going down the tunnel once again. I have been that way twice, when I knew
there was a dragon at the other end, so I will risk a third visit when I am no longer sure. Anyway the
only way out is down. And I think time you had better all come with me.” In desperation they
agreed, and Thorin was the first go forward by Bilbo’s side.
“Now do be careful!” whispered the hobbit, “and quiet as you can be! There may be no
Smaug at the bottom but then again there may be. Don’t let us take any unnecessary risks!”
Down, down they went. The dwarves could not, course, compare with the hobbit in real
stealth, and the made a deal of puffing and shuffling which echoes magnified alarmingly; but
though every now and again Bilbo in fear stopped and listened, not a sound stirred below Near the
bottom, as well as he could judge, Bilbo slipped on his ring and went ahead. But he did not need it:
the darkness was complete, and they were all invisible, ring or no ring. In fact so black was it that
the hobbit came to the opening unexpectedly, put his hand on air, stumbled for ward, and rolled
headlong into the hall! There he lay face downwards on the floor and did no dare to get up, or
hardly even to breathe. But nothing moved. There was not a gleam of light-unless, as seemed to
him, when at last he slowly raised his head, there was a pale white glint, above him and far off in
the gloom. But certainly it was not a spark of dragon-fire, though the wormstench was heavy in the
place, and the taste of vapour was on his tongue.
At length Mr. Baggins could bear it no longer. “Come found you, Smaug, you worm!” he
squeaked aloud. “Stop playing hide-and-seek! Give me a light, and then eat me if you can catch
me!”
Faint echoes ran round the unseen hall, but there was no answer. Bilbo got up, and found that
he did not know in what direction to turn. “Now I wonder what on earth Smaug is playing at,” he
said. “He is not at home today (or tonight, or whatever it is), I do believe. If Oin and Gloin have not
lost their time tinder-boxes, perhaps we can make a little light, and have a look round before the
luck turns.”
“Light!” he cried. “Can anybody make a light?”
The dwarves, of course, were very alarmed when Bilbo fell forward down the step with a
bump into the hall, and they sat huddled just where he had left them at the end the tunnel.
“Sh! sh!” they hissed, when they heard his voice: and though that helped the hobbit to find out
where they were, was some time before he could get anything else out of them. But in the end,
when Bilbo actually began to stamp in the floor, and screamed out light!’ at the top of his thrill
voice, Thorin gave way, and Oin and Gloin were sent back to their bundles at the top of the tunnel.
After a while a twinkling gleam showed them returning, in with a small pine-torch alight in his
hand, and Gloin with a bundle of others under his arm. Quickly Bilbo trotted to the door and took
the torch; but he could not persuade the dwarves to light the others or to come and join him yet. As
Thorin carefully explained, Mr. Baggins was still officially their expert burglar and investigator. If
he liked to risk a light, that was his affair. They would wait in the tunnel for his report. So they sat
near the door and watched.
They saw the little dark shape of the hobbit start across the floor holding his tiny light aloft.
Every now and again, while he was still near enough, they caught a glint and a tinkle as he stumbled
on some golden thing. The light grew smaller as he wandered away into the vast hall; then it began
to rise dancing into the air. Bilbo was climbing the great mound of treasure. Soon he stood upon the
top, and still went on. Then they saw him halt and stoop for a moment; but they did not know the
reason. It was the Arkenstone, the Heart of the Mountain. So Bilbo guessed from Thorin’s
description; but indeed there could not be two such gems, even in so marvellous a hoard, even in allthe world. Ever as he climbed, the same white gleam had shone before him and drawn his feet
towards Slowly it grew to a little globe of pallid light. Now as came near, it was tinged with a
flickering sparkle of man colours at the surface, reflected and splintered from the wavering light of
his torch. At last he looked down upon it and he caught his breath. The great jewel shone before he
feet of its own inner light, and yet, cut and fashioned by the dwarves, who had dug it from the heart
of the mountain long ago, it took all light that fell upon it and-changes it into ten thousand sparks of
white radiance shot with glints of the rainbow.
Suddenly Bilbo’s arm went towards it drawn by it enchantment. His small hand would not
close about it for it was a large and heavy gem; but he lifted it, shut his eyes, and put it in his
deepest pocket.
“Now I am a burglar indeed!” thought he. “But I suppose I must tell the dwarves about
it-some time. The did say I could pick and choose my own share; and I think I would choose this, if
they took all the rest!” All the same he had an uncomfortable feeling that the picking and choosing
had not really been meant to include this marvellous gem, and that trouble would yet come of it.
Now he went on again. Down the other side of the great mound he climbed, and the spark of his
torch vanished from the sight of the watching dwarves. But soon they saw it far away in the
distance again. Bilbo was crossing the floor of the hall.
He went on, until he came to the great doors at the further side, and there a draught of air
refreshed him, but it almost puffed out his light. He peeped timidly through and caught a glimpse of
great passages and of the dim beginnings of wide stairs going up into the gloom. And still there was
no sight nor sound of Smaug. He was just going to turn and go back, when a black shape swooped
at him and brushed his face. He squeaked and started, stumbled backwards and fell. His torch
dropped head downwards and went out! “Only a bat, I suppose and hope!” he said miserably. But
now what am I to do? Which is East, South, North West?”
“Thorin! Balin! Oin! Gloin! Fill! Kili!” he cried as loud he could-it seemed a thin little noise
in the wide blackness. “The light’s gone out! Someone come and find and help me!” For the
moment his courage had failed together.
Faintly the dwarves heard his small cries, though the only word they could catch was ‘help!’
“Now what on earth or under it has happened?” said Thorin. “Certainly not the dragon, or he
would not go on squeaking.”
They waited a moment or two, and still there were no dragon-noises, no sound at all in fact
but Bilbo’s distant voice. “Come, one of you, get another light or two!” Thorin ordered. “It seems
we have got to go and help our burglar.”
“It is about our turn to help,” said Balin, “and I am quite willing to go. Anyway I expect it is
safe for the moment.”
Gloin lit several more torches, and then they all crept out, one by one, and went along the wall
as hurriedly as they could. It was not long before they met Bilbo himself coming back towards
them. His wits had quickly returned soon as he saw the twinkle of their lights.
“Only a bat and a dropped torch, nothing worse!” he said in answer to their questions. Though
they were much relieved, they were inclined to be grumpy at being frightened for nothing; but what
they would have said, if he had told them at that moment about the Arkenstone, I don’t know. The
mere fleeting glimpses of treasure which they had caught as they went along had rekindled all the
fire of their dwarvish hearts; and when the heart of a dwarf, even the most respectable, is wakened
by gold and by jewels, he grows suddenly bold, and he may become fierce.
The dwarves indeed no longer needed any urging. All were now eager to explore the hall
while they had the chance, and willing to believe that, for the present, Smaug was away from home.
Each now gripped a lighted torch; and as they gazed, first on one side and then on another, they
forgot fear and even caution. They spoke aloud, and cried out to one another, as they lifted old
treasures from the mound or from the wall and held them in the light caressing and fingering them.
Fili and Kili were almost in merry mood, and finding still hanging there many golden harps strung
with silver they took them and struck them; and being magical (and also untouched by the dragon,
who had small interests in music) they were still in tune. The dark hall was filled with a melody thathad long been silent. But most of the dwarves were more practical; they gathered gems and stuffed
their pockets, and let what they could not carry far back through their fingers with a sigh. Thorin
was not least among these; but always he searched from side to side for something which he could
not find. It was the Arkenstone but he spoke of it yet to no one.
Now the dwarves took down mail and weapons from the walls, and armed themselves. Royal
indeed did Thorin look, clad in a coat of gold-plated rings, with a silver hafted axe in a belt crusted
with scarlet stones. “Mr. Baggins!” he cried. “Here is the first payment of your reward! Cast off
your old coat and put on this!”
With that he put on Bilbo a small coat of mail, wrought for some young elf-prince long ago. It
was of silver-steel which the elves call mithril, and with it went a belt of pearls and crystals. A light
helm of figured leather, strengthened beneath with hoops of steel, and studded about the bring with
white gems, was set upon the hobbit’s head.
“I feel magnificent,” he thought; “but I expect I look rather absurd. How they would laugh on
the Hill at home Still I wish there was a looking-glass handy!”
All the same Mr. Baggins kept his head more clear of the bewitchment of the hoard than the
dwarves did. Long before the dwarves were tired of examining the treasures he became wary of it
and sat down on the floor; and he began to wonder nervously what the end of it all would be “I
would give a good many of these precious goblets, thought, “for a drink of something cheering out
of one Beorn’s wooden bowls!” “Thorin!” he cried aloud. “What next? We are armed, but what
good has any armour ever been before against Smaug the Dreadful? This treasure is not yet won
back. We are not looking for gold yet, but for a way of escape; and we have tempted luck too long!”
‘”You speak the truth!” answered Thorin, recovering his wits. “Let us go! I will guide you.
Not in a thousand years should I forget the ways of this palace.” Then he hailed the others, and they
gathered together, and holding their torches above their heads they passed through the gaping doors,
not without many a backward glance of longing.
Their glittering mail they had covered again with their old cloaks and their bright helms with
their tattered hoods, and one by one they walked behind Thorin, a line of little lights in the darkness
that halted often, listening in fear once more for any rumour of the dragon’s coming. Though all the
old adornments were long mouldered or destroyed, and though all was befouled and blasted with
the comings and goings of the monster, Thorin knew every passage and every turn. They climbed
long stairs, and turned and went down wide echoing ways, and turned again and climbed yet more
stairs, and yet more’ stairs again.
These were smooth, cut out of the living rock broad and lair; and up, up, the dwarves went,
and they met no sign of any living thing, only furtive shadows that fled from the approach of their
torches fluttering in the draughts. The steps were not made, all the same, for hobbit-legs, and Bilbo
was just feeling that he could go on no longer, when suddenly the roof sprang high and far beyond
the reach of their torch-light. A white glimmer could be seen coming through some opening far
above, and the air smelt sweeter. Before them light came dimly through great doors, that hung
twisted on their hinges and half burnt.
“This is the great chamber of Thror,” said Thorin; “the hall of feasting and of council. Not far
off now is the Front Gate.”
They passed through the ruined chamber. Tables were rotting there; chairs and benches were
lying there overturned, charred and decaying. Skulls and bones were upon the floor among flagons
and bowls and broken drinking-horns and dust. As they came through yet more doors at the further
end, a sound of water fell upon their ears, and the grey light grew suddenly more full. “There is the
birth of the Running River,” said Thorin. “From here it hastens to the Gate. Let us follow it!”
Out of a dark opening in a wall of rock there issued a boiling water, and it flowed swirling in
a narrow channel, carved and made straight and deep by the cunning of ancient hands. Beside it ran
a stone-paved road, wide enough for many men abreast. Swiftly along this they ran, and round a
wide-sweeping turn-and behold! before them stood the broad light of day. In front there rose a tall
arch, still showing the fragments of old carven work within, worn and splintered and blackened
though it was. A misty sun sent its pale light between the arms of the Mountain, and beams of goldfell on the pavement at the threshold.
A whirl of bats frightened from slumber by their smoking torches flurried over them; as they
sprang forward their feet slithered on stones rubbed smooth and slimed by the passing of the
dragon. Now before them the water fell noisily outward and foamed down towards the valley. They
flung their pale torches to the ground, and stood gazing out with dazzled eyes. They were come to
the Front Gate, and were looking out upon Dale.
“Well!” said Bilbo, “I never expected to be looking out of this door. And I never expected to
be so pleased to see the sun again, and to feel the wind on my face. But, ow! this wind is cold!”
It was. A bitter easterly breeze blew with a threat of oncoming winter. It swirled over and
round the arms of the Mountain into the valley, and sighed among the rocks. After their long time in
the stewing depths of the dragon-haunted caverns, they shivered in the sun. Suddenly Bilbo realized
that he was not only tired but also very hungry indeed. “It seems to be late morning,” he said, “and
so I suppose it is more or less breakfast-time – if there is any breakfast to have. But I don’t feel that
Smaug’s front doorstep is the safest place for a meal. Do let’s go somewhere where we can sit quiet
for a bit!” “Quite right!” said Balin. “And I think I know which way we should go: we ought to
make for the old look-out post at the Southwest corner of the Mountain.”
“How far is that?” asked the hobbit.
“Five hours march, I should think. It will be rough going. The road from the Gate along the
left edge of the stream seems all broken up. But look down there! The river loops suddenly east
across Dale in front of the ruined town. At that point there was once a bridge, leading to steep stairs
that climbed up the right bank, and so to a road running towards Ravenhill. There is (or was) a path
that left the road and climbed up to the post. A hard climb, too, even if the old steps are still there.”
“Dear me!” grumbled the hobbit. “More walking and more climbing without breakfast! I
wonder how many breakfasts, and other meals, we have missed inside that nasty clockless, timeless
hole?”
As a matter of fact two nights and the day between had gone by (and not altogether without
food) since the dragon smashed the magic door, but Bilbo had quite lost count, and it might have
been one night or a week of nights for all he could tell.
“Come, come!” said Thorin laughing – his spirits had begun to rise again, and he rattled the
precious stones in his pockets. “Don’t call my place a nasty hole! You wait till it has been cleaned
and redecorated!” “That won’t be till Smaug’s dead,” said Bilbo glumly. “In the meanwhile where is
he? I would give a good breakfast to know. I hope he is not up on the Mountain looking down at
us!”
That idea disturbed the dwarves mightily, and they quickly decided that Bilbo and Balin were
right.
“We must move away from here,” said Don. “I feel as if his eyes were on the back of my
head.”
“It’s a cold lonesome place,” said Bombur. “There may be drink, but I see no sign of food. A
dragon would always be hungry in such parts.” “Come on! Come on!” cried the others. “Let us
follow Balm’s path!” Under the rocky wall to the right there was no path, so on they trudged among
the stones on the left side of the river, and the emptiness and desolation soon sobered even Thorin
again. The bridge that Balin had spoken of they found long fallen, and most of its stones were now
only boulders in the shallow noisy stream; but they forded the water without much difficulty, and
found the ancient steps, and climbed the high bank. After going a short way they struck the old
road, and before long came to a deep dell sheltered among the rocks; there they rested for a while
and had such a breakfast as they could, chiefly cram and water. (If you want to know what cram is, I
can only say that I don’t know the recipe; but it is biscuitish, keeps good indefinitely, is supposed to
be sustaining, and is certainly not entertaining, being in fact very uninteresting except as a chewing
exercise. It was made by the Lake-men for long journeys).
After that they went on again; and now the road struck westwards and left the river, and the
great shoulder of the south-pointing mountain-spur drew ever nearer. At length they reached the hill
path. It scrambled steeply up, and they plodded slowly one behind the other, till at last in the lateafternoon they came to the top of the ridge and saw the wintry sun going downwards to the West.
Here they found a flat place without a wall on three sides, but backed to the North by a rocky
face in which there was an opening like a door. From that door there was a wide view East and
South and West. “Here,” said Balin, “in the old days we used always to keep watchmen, and that
door behind leads into a rock-hewn chamber that was made here as a guardroom. There were
several places like it round the Mountain. But there seemed small need for watching in the days of
our prosperity, and the guards were made over comfortable, perhaps – otherwise we might have had
longer warnings of the coming of the dragon, and things might have been different. Still, “here we
can now lie hid and sheltered for a while, and can see much without being seen.”
“Not much use, if we have been seen coming here,” said Dori, who was always looking up
towards the Mountain’s peak, as if he expected to see Smaug perched there like a bird on a steeple.
“We must take our chance of that,” said Thorin. “We can go no further to-day.”
“Hear, hear!” cried Bilbo, and flung himself on the ground.
In the rock-chamber there would have been room for a hundred, and there was a small
chamber further in, more removed from the cold outside. It was quite deserted; not even wild
animals seemed to have used it in all the days of Smaug’s dominion. There they laid their burdens;
and some threw themselves down at once and slept, but the others sat near the outer door and
discussed their plans.
In all their talk they came perpetually back to one thing: where was
Smaug? They looked West and there was nothing, and East there was nothing, and in the
South there was no sign of the dragon, but there was a gathering of very many birds. At that they
gazed and wondered; but they were no nearer understanding it, when the first cold stars came out.
Chapter   
Fire and Water
Now if you wish, like the dwarves, to hear news of Smaug, you must go back again to the
evening when he smashed the door and flew off in rage, two days before.
The men of the lake-town Esgaroth were mostly indoors, for the breeze was from the black
East and chill, but a few were walking on the quays, and watching, as they were fond of doing, the
stars shine out from the smooth patches of the lake as they opened in the sky. From their town the
Lonely Mountain was mostly screened by the low hills at the far end of the lake, through a gap in
which the Running River came down from the North. Only its high peak could they see in clear
weather, and they looked seldom at it, for it was ominous and dreary even in the light of morning.
Now it was lost and gone, blotted in the dark.
Suddenly it flickered back to view; a brief glow touched it and faded. “Look!” said one. “The
lights again! Last night the watchmen saw them start and fade from midnight until dawn. Something
is happening up there.” “Perhaps the King under the Mountain is forging gold,” said another. “It is
long since he went north. It is time the songs began to prove themselves again.”
“Which king?” said another with a grim voice. “As like as not it is the marauding fire of the
Dragon, the only king under the Mountain we have ever known.”
“You are always foreboding gloomy things!” said the others. “Anything from floods to
poisoned fish. Think of something cheerful!” Then suddenly a great light appeared in the low place
in the hills and the northern end of the lake turned golden.
“The King beneath the Mountain!” they shouted. “His wealth is like the Sun, his silver like a
fountain, his rivers golden run! The river is running gold from the Mountain!” they cried, and
everywhere windows were opening and feet were hurrying.
There was once more a tremendous excitement and enthusiasm. But the grim-voiced fellow
ran hotfoot to the Master. “The dragon is coming or I am a fool!” he cried. “Cut the bridges! To
arms! To arms!”
Then warning trumpets were suddenly sounded, and echoed along the rocky shores. The
cheering stopped and the joy was turned to dread. So it was that the dragon did not find them quiteunprepared. Before long, so great was his speed, they could see him as a spark of fire rushing
towards them and growing ever huger and more bright, and not the most foolish doubted that the
prophecies had gone rather wrong. Still they had a little time. Every vessel in the town was filled
with water, every warrior was armed, every arrow and dart was ready, and the bridge to the land
was thrown down and destroyed, before the roar of Smaug’s terrible approach grew loud, and the
lake rippled red as fire beneath the awful beating of his wings.
Amid shrieks and wailing and the shouts of men he came over them, swept
towards the bridges and was foiled! The bridge was gone, and his enemies were on an island
in deep water-too deep and dark and cool for his liking. If he plunged into it, a vapour and a steam
would arise enough to cover all the land with a mist for days; but the lake was mightier than he, it
would quench him before he could pass through.
Roaring he swept back over the town. A hail of dark arrows leaped up and snapped and rattled
on his scales and jewels, and their shafts fell back kindled by his breath burning and hissing into the
lake. No fireworks you ever imagined equalled the sights that night. At the twanging of the bows
and the shrilling of the trumpets the dragon’s wrath blazed to its height, till he was blind and mad
with it. No one had dared to give battle to him for many an age; nor would they have dared now, if
it had not been for the grim-voiced man (Bard was his name), who ran to and fro cheering on the
archers and urging the Master to order them to fight to the last arrow.
Fire leaped from the dragon’s jaws. He circled for a while high in the air above them lighting
all the lake; the trees by the shores shone like copper and like blood with leaping shadows of dense
black at their feet. Then down he swooped straight through the arrow-storm, reckless in his rage,
taking no heed to turn his scaly sides towards his foes, seeking only to set their town ablaze.
Fire leaped from thatched roofs and wooden beam-ends as he hurtled down and past and
round again, though all had been drenched with water before he came. Once more water was flung
by a hundred hands wherever a spark appeared. Back swirled the dragon. A sweep of his tail and the
roof of the Great House crumbled and smashed down. Flames unquenchable sprang high into the
night. Another swoop and another, and another house and then another sprang afire and fell; and
still no arrow hindered Smaug or hurt him more than a fly from the marshes. Already men were
jumping into the water on every side. Women and children were being huddled into laden boats in
the market-pool. Weapons were flung down. There was mourning and weeping, where but a little
time ago the old songs of mirth to come had been sung about the dwarves. Now men cursed their
names. The Master himself was turning to his great gilded boat, hoping to row away in the
confusion and save himself. Soon all the town would be deserted and burned down to the surface of
the lake. That was the dragon’s hope. They could all get into boats for all he cared. There he could
have fine sport hunting them, or they could stop till they starved. Let them try to get to land and he
would be ready. Soon he would set all the shoreland woods ablaze and wither every field and
pasture. Just now he was enjoying the sport of town-baiting more than he had enjoyed anything for
years. But there was still a company of archers that held their ground among the burning houses.
Their captain was Bard, grim-voiced and grim-faced, whose friends had accused him of
prophesying floods and poisoned fish, though they knew his worth and courage. He was a
descendant in long line of Girion, Lord of Dale, whose wife and child had escaped down the
Running River from the ruin long ago. Now he shot with a great yew bow, till all his arrows but one
were spent. The flames were near him. His companions were leaving him. He bent his bow for the
last time. Suddenly out of the dark something fluttered to his shoulder. He started-but it was only an
old thrush. Unafraid it perched by his ear and it brought him news. Marvelling he found he could
understand its tongue, for he was of the race of Dale.
“Wait! Wait!” it said to him. “The moon is rising. Look for the hollow of the left breast as he
flies and turns above you!” And while Bard paused in wonder it told him of tidings up in the
Mountain and of all that it had heard. Then Bard drew his bow-string to his ear. The dragon was
circling back, flying low, and as he came the moon rose above the eastern shore and silvered his
great wings.
“Arrow!” said the bowman. “Black arrow! I have saved you to the last. You have never failedme and always I have recovered you. I had you from my father and he from of old. If ever you came
from the forges of the true king under the Mountain, go now and speed well!”
The dragon swooped once more lower than ever, and as he turned and dived down his belly
glittered white with sparkling fires of gems in the moon-but not in one place. The great bow
twanged. The black arrow sped straight from the string, straight for the hollow by the left breast
where the foreleg was flung wide. In it smote and vanished, barb, shaft and feather, so fierce was its
flight. With a shriek that deafened men, felled trees and split stone, Smaug shot spouting into the
air, turned over and crashed down from on high in ruin.
Full on the town he fell. His last throes splintered it to sparks and gledes. The lake roared in.
A vast steam leaped up, white in the sudden dark under the moon. There was a hiss, a gushing
whirl, and then silence. And that was the end of Smaug and Esgaroth, but not of Bard. The waxing
moon rose higher and higher and the wind grew loud and cold. It twisted the white fog into bending
pillars and hurrying clouds and drove it off to the West to scatter in tattered shreds over the marshes
before Mirkwood. Then the many boats could be seen dotted dark on the surface of the lake, and
down the wind came the voices of the people of Esgaroth lamenting their lost town and goods and
ruined houses. But they had really much to be thankful for, had they thought of it, though it could
hardly be expected that they should just then: three quarters of the people of the town had at least
escaped alive; their woods and fields and pastures and cattle and most of their boats remained
undamaged; and the dragon was dead. What that meant they had not yet realized. They gathered in
mournful crowds upon the western shores, shivering in the cold wind, and their first complaints and
anger were against the Master, who had left the town so soon, while some were still willing to
defend it. “He may have a good head for business-especially his own business,” some murmured,
“but he is no good when anything serious happens!” And they praised the courage of Bard and his
last mighty shot. “If only he had not been killed,” they all said, “we would make him a king. Bard
the Dragon-shooter of the line of Girion! Alas that he is lost!”
And in the very midst of their talk, a tall figure stepped from the shadows. He was drenched
with water, his black hair hung wet over his face and shoulders, and a fierce light was in his eyes.
“Bard is not lost!” he cried. “He dived from Esgaroth, when the enemy was slain. I am Bard,
of the line of Girion; I am the slayer of the dragon!” “King Bard! King Bard!” they shouted; but the
Master ground his chattering teeth.
“Girion was lord of Dale, not king of Esgaroth,” he said. “In the Lake-town we have always
elected masters from among the old and wise, and have not endured the rule of mere fighting men.
Let ‘King Bard’ go back to his own kingdom-Dale is now freed by his valour, and nothing binders
his return. And any that wish can go with him, if they prefer the cold shores under the shadow of the
Mountain to the green shores of the lake. The wise will stay here and hope to rebuild our town, and
enjoy again in time its peace and riches.” “We will have King Bard!” the people near at hand
shouted in reply. “We have had enough of the old men and the money-counters!” And people further
off took up the cry: “Up the Bowman, and down with Moneybags,” till the clamour echoed along
the shore.
“I am the last man to undervalue Bard the Bowman,” said the Master warily (for Bard now
stood close beside him). “He has tonight earned an eminent place in the roll of the benefactors of
our town; and he is worthy of many imperishable songs. But, why O People?”-and here the Master
rose to his feet and spoke very loud and clear – “why do I get all your blame? For what fault am I to
be deposed? Who aroused the dragon from his slumber, I might ask? Who obtained of us rich gifts
and ample help, and led us to believe that old songs could come true? Who played on our soft hearts
and our pleasant fancies? What sort of gold have they sent down the river to reward us? Dragon-fire
and ruin! From whom should we claim the recompense of our damage, and aid for our widows and
orphans?”
As you see, the Master had not got his position for nothing. The result of his words was that
for the moment the people quite forgot their idea of a new king, and turned their angry thoughts
towards Thorin and his company. Wild and bitter words were shouted from many sides; and some of
those who had before sung the old songs loudest, were now heard as loudly crying that the dwarveshad stirred the dragon up against them deliberately! “Fools!” said Bard. “Why waste words and
wrath on those unhappy creatures? Doubtless they perished first in fire, before Smaug came to us.”
Then even as he was speaking, the thought came into his heart of the fabled treasure of the
Mountain lying without guard or owner, and he fell suddenly silent. He thought of the Master’s
words, and of Dale rebuilt, and filled with golden bells, if he could but find the men.
At length he spoke again: “This is no time for angry words. Master, or for considering
weighty plans of change. There is work to do. I serve you still-though after a while I may think
again of your words and go North with any that will follow me.”
Then he strode off to help in the ordering of the camps and in the care of the sick and the
wounded. But the Master scowled at his back as he went, and remained sitting on the ground. He
thought much but said little, unless it was to call loudly for men to bring him fire and food. Now
everywhere Bard went he found talk running like fire among the people concerning the vast treasure
that was now unguarded. Men spoke of the recompense for all their harm that they would soon get
from it, and wealth over and to spare with which to buy rich things from the South; and it cheered
them greatly in their plight. That was as well, for the night was bitter and miserable. Shelters could
be contrived for few (the Master had one) and there was little food (even the Master went short).
Many took ill of wet and cold and sorrow that night, and afterwards died, who had escaped
uninjured from the ruin of the town; and in the days that followed there was much sickness and
great hunger. Meanwhile Bard took the lead, and ordered things as he wished, though always in the
Master’s name, and he had a hard task to govern the people and direct the preparations for their
protection and housing. Probably most of them would have perished in the winter that now hurried
after autumn, if help had not been to hand. But help came swiftly; for Bard at once had speedy
messengers sent up the river to the Forest to ask the aid of the King of the Elves of the Wood, and
these messengers had found a host already on the move, although it was then only the third day
after the fall of Smaug. The Elvenking had received news from his own messengers and from the
birds that loved his folk, and already knew much of what had happened. Very great indeed was the
commotion among all things with wings that dwelt on the borders of the Desolation of the Dragon.
The air was filled with circling flocks, and their swift-flying messengers flew here and there across
the sky. Above the borders of the Forest there was whistling, crying and piping. Far over Mirkwood
tidings spread: “Smaug is dead!” Leaves rustled and startled ears were lifted. Even before the
Elvenking rode forth the news had passed west right to the pinewoods of the Misty Mountains;
Beorn had heard it in his wooden house, and the goblins were at council in their caves.
“That will be the last we shall hear of Thorin Oakenshield, I fear,” said the king. “He would
have done better to have remained my guest. It is an ill wind, all the same,” he added, “that blows
no one any good.” For he too had not forgotten the legend of the wealth of Thror. So it was that
Bard’s messengers found him now marching with many spearmen and bowmen; and crows were
gathered thick, above him, for they thought that war was awakening again, such as had not been in
those parts for a long age. But the king, when he received the prayers of Bard, had pity, for he was
the lord of a good and kindly people; so turning his march, which had at first been direct towards
the Mountain, he hastened now down the river to the Long Lake. He had not boats or rafts enough
for his host, and they were forced to go the slower way by foot; but great store of goods he sent
ahead by water. Still elves are light-footed, and though they were not in these days much used to the
marches and the treacherous lands between the Forest and the Lake, their going was swift. Only five
days after the death of the dragon they came upon the shores and looked on the ruins of the town.
Their welcome was good, as may be expected, and the men and their Master were ready to make
any bargain for the future in return for the Elvenking’s aid.
Their plans were soon made. With the women and the children, the old and the unfit, the
Master remained behind; and with him were some men of crafts and many skilled elves; and they
busied themselves felling trees, and collecting the timber sent down from the Forest. Then they set
about raising many huts by the shore against the oncoming winter; and also under the Master’s
direction they began the planning of a new town, designed more fair and large even than before, but
not in the same place. They removed northward higher up the shore; for ever after they had a dreadof the water where the dragon lay. He would never again return to his golden bed, but was stretched
cold as stone, twisted upon the floor of the shallows. There for ages his huge bones could be seen in
calm weather amid the ruined piles of the old town. But few dared to cross the cursed spot, and
none dared to dive into the shivering water or recover the precious stones that fell from his rotting
carcass. But all the men of arms who were still able, and the most of the Elvenking’s array, got
ready to march north to the Mountain. It was thus that in eleven days from the ruin of the town the
head of their host passed the rock-gates at the end of the lake and came into the desolate lands.
Chapter   
The Gathering of the Clouds
Now we will return to Bilbo and the dwarves. All night one of them had watched, but when
morning came they had not heard or seen any sign of danger. But ever more thickly the birds were
gathering. Their companies came flying from the South; and the crows that still lived about the
Mountain were wheeling and crying unceasingly above.
“Something strange is happening,” said Thorin. “The time has gone for the autumn
wanderings; and these are birds that dwell always in the land; there are starlings and flocks of
finches; and far off there are many carrion birds as if a battle were afoot!”
Suddenly Bilbo pointed: “There is that old thrush again!” he cried. “He seems to have
escaped, when Smaug smashed the mountain-side, but I don’t suppose the snails have!”
Sure enough the old thrush was there, and as Bilbo pointed, he flew towards them and
perched on a stone near by. Then he fluttered his wings and sang; then he cocked his head on one
side, as if to listen; and again he sang, and again he listened.
“I believe he is trying to tell us something,” said Balin; “but I cannot follow the speech of
such birds, it is very quick and difficult. Can you make it out Baggins?”
“Not very well,” said Bilbo (as a matter of fact, he could make nothing of it at all); “but the
old fellow seems.very excited.”
“I only wish he was a raven!” said Balin.
“I thought you did not like them! You seemed very shy of them, when we came this way
before.”
“Those were crows! And nasty suspicious-looking creatures at that, and rude as well. You
must have heard the ugly names they were calling after us. But the ravens are different. There used
to be great friendship between them and the people of Thror; and they often brought us secret news,
and were rewarded with such bright things as they coveted to hide in their dwellings. “They live
many a year, and their memories are long, and they hand on their wisdom to their children. I knew
many among the ravens of the rocks when I was a dwarf– lad. This very height was once named
Ravenhill, because there was a wise and famous pair, old Care and his wife, that lived here above
the guard-chamber. But I don’t suppose that any of that ancient breed linger here now.”
No sooner had he finished speaking than the old thrush gave a loud call, and immediately flew
away.
“We may not understand him, but that old bird understands us, I am sure,” said Balin. “Keep
watch now, and see what happens!” Before long there was a fluttering of wings, and back came the
thrush; and with him came a most decrepit old bird. He was getting blind, he could hardly fly, and
the top of his head was bald. He was an aged raven of great size. He alighted stiffly on the ground
before them, slowly flapped his wings, and bobbed towards Thorin.
“O Thorin son of Thrain, and Balin son of Fundin,” he croaked (and Bilbo could understand
what he said, for he used ordinary language and not bird-speech). “I am Rac son of Carc. Carc is
dead, but he was well known to you once. It is a hundred years and three and fifty since I came out
of the egg, but I do not forget what my father told me. Now I am the chief of the great ravens of the
Mountain. We are few, but we remember still the king that was of old. Most of my people are
abroad, for there are great tidings in the South – some are tidings of joy to you, and some you will
not think so good. “Behold! the birds are gathering back again to the Mountain and to Dale fromSouth and East and West, for word has gone out that Smaug is dead!” “Dead! Dead?” shouted the
dwarves. “Dead! Then we have been in needless fear-and the treasure is ours!”
They all sprang up and began to caper about for joy.
“Yes, dead,” said Rac. “The thrush, may his feathers never fall, saw him die, and we may trust
his words. He saw him fall in battle with the men of Esgaroth the third night back from now at the
rising of the moon.” It was some time before Thorin could bring the dwarves to be silent and listen
to the raven’s news. At length when he had told all the tale of the battle he went on:
“So much for joy, Thorin Oakenshield. You may go back to your halls in safety; all the
treasure is yours-for the moment. But many are gathering hither beside the birds. The news of the
death of the guardian has already gone far and wide, and the legend of the wealth of Thror has not
lost in the telling during many years; many are eager for a share of the spoil. Already a host of the
elves is on the way, and carrion birds are with them hoping for battle and slaughter. By the lake men
murmur that their sorrows are due to the dwarves; for they are homeless and many have died, and
Smaug has destroyed their town. They too think to find amends from your treasure, whether you are
alive or dead.
“Your own wisdom must decide your course, but thirteen is small remnant of the great folk of
Durin that once dwelt here, and now are scattered far. If you will listen to my counsel, you will not
trust the Master of the Lake-men, but rather him that shot the dragon with his bow. Bard is he, of
the race of Dale, of the line of Girion; he is a grim man but true. We would see peace once more
among dwarves and men and elves after the long desolation; but it may cost you dear in gold. I have
spoken.”
Then Thorin burst forth in anger: “Our thanks, Rac Carc’s son. You and your people shall not
be forgotten. But none of our gold shall thieves take or the violent carry off while we are alive. If
you would earn our thanks still more, bring us news of any that draw near. Also I would beg of you,
if any of you are still young and strong of wing, that you would send messengers to our kin in the
mountains of the North, both west from here and east, and tell them of our plight. But go specially
to my cousin Dain in the Iron Hills, for he has many people well-armed, and dwells nearest to this
place. Bid him hasten!” “I will not say if this counsel be good or bad,” croaked Rac; “but I will do
what can be done.” Then off he slowly flew.
“Back now to the Mountain!” cried Thorin. “We have little time to lose.”
“And little food to use!” cried Bilbo, always practical on such points. In any case he felt that
the adventure was, properly speaking, over.with the death of the dragon-in which he was much
mistaken-and he would have given most of his share of the profits for the peaceful winding up of
these affairs. “Back to the Mountain!” cried the dwarves as if they had not heard him, so back he
had to go with them. As you have heard some of the events already, you will see that the dwarves
still had some days before them. They explored the caverns once more, and found, as they expected,
that only the Front Gate remained open; all the other gates (except, of course, the small secret door)
had long ago been broken and blocked by Smaug, and no sign of them remained. So now they
began to labour hard in fortifying the main entrance, and in remaking the road that led from it. Tools
were to be found in plenty that the miners and quarriers and builders of old had used; and at such
work the dwarves were still very skilled.
As they worked the ravens brought them constant tidings. In this way they learned that the
Elvenking had turned aside to the Lake, and they still had a breathing space. Better still, they heard
that three of their ponies had escaped and were wandering wild far down the banks of the Running
River, not far from where the rest of their stores had been left. So while the others went on with
their work, Fili and Kili were sent, guided by a raven, to find the ponies and bring back all they
could.
They were four days gone, and by that time they knew that the joined armies of the Lake-men
and the Elves were hurrying towards the Mountain. But now their hopes were higher; for they had
food for some weeks with care-chiefly cram, of course, and they were very tired of it; but cram is
much better than nothing-and already the gate was blocked with a wall of squared stones laid dry,
but very thick and high across the opening. There were holes in the wall through which they couldsee (or shoot) but no entrance. They climbed in or out with ladders, and hauled stuff up with ropes.
For the issuing of the stream they had contrived a small low arch under the new wall; but near the
entrance they had so altered the narrow bed that a wide pool stretched from the mountain-wall to
the head of the fall over which the stream went towards Dale. Approach to the Gate was now only
possible, without swimming, along a narrow ledge of the cliff, to the right as one looked outwards
from the wall. The ponies they had brought only to the head of the steps above the old bridge, and
unloading them there had bidden them return to their masters and sent them back riderless to the
South. There came a night when suddenly there were many lights as of fires and torches away south
in Dale before them.
“They have come!” called Balin. “And their camp is very great. They must have come into the
valley under the cover of dusk along both banks of the river.”
That night the dwarves slept little. The morning was still pale when they saw a company
approaching. From behind their wall they watched them come up to the valley’s head and climb
slowly up. Before long they could see that both men of the lake armed as if for war and elvish
bowmen were among them. At length the foremost of these climbed the tumbled rocks and appeared
at the top of the falls; and very great was their surprise to see the pool before them and the Gate
blocked with a wall of new-hewn stone.
As they stood pointing and speaking to one another Thorin hailed them:
“Who are you,” he called in a very loud voice, “that come as if in war to the gates of Thorin
son of Thrain, King under the Mountain, and what do you desire?”
But they answered nothing. Some turned swiftly back, and the others after gazing for a while
at the Gate and its defences soon followed them. That day the camp was moved and was brought
right between the arms of the Mountain. The rocks echoed then with voices and with song, as they
had not done for many a day. There was the sound, too, of elven-harps and of sweet music; and as it
echoed up towards them it seemed that the chill of the air was warmed, and they caught faintly the
fragrance of woodland flowers blossoming in spring. Then Bilbo longed to escape from the dark
fortress and to go down and join in the mirth and feasting by the fires. Some of the younger dwarves
were moved in their hearts, too, and they muttered that they wished things had fallen out otherwise
and that they might welcome such folk as friends; but Thorin scowled.
Then the dwarves themselves brought forth harps and instruments regained from the hoard,
and made music to soften his mood; but their song was not as elvish song, and was much like the
song they had sung long before in Bilbo’s little hobbit-hole.
“Under the Mountain dark and tall
The King has come unto his hall!
His foe is dead, the Worm of Dread,
And ever so his foes shall fall.
The sword is sharp, the spear is long,
The arrow swift, the Gate is strong;
The heart is bold that looks on gold;
The dwarves no more shall suffer wrong.
The dwarves of yore made mighty spells,
While hammers fell like ringing bells
In places deep, where dark things sleep,
In hollow halls beneath the fells.
On silver necklaces they strung
The light of stars, on crowns they hung
The dragon-fire, from twisted wire
The melody of harps they wrung.
The mountain throne once more is freed!
O! wandering folk, the summons heed!
Come haste! Come haste! across the waste!
The king of friend and kin has need.Now call we over mountains cold,
‘Come hack unto the caverns old’!
Here at the Gates the king awaits,
His hands are rich with gems and gold.
The king is come unto his hall
Under the Mountain dark and tall.
The Worm of Dread is slain and dead,
And ever so our foes shall fall!”
This song appeared to please Thorin, and he smiled again and grew merry; and he began
reckoning the distance to the Iron Hills and how long it would be before Dain could reach the
Lonely Mountain, if he had set out as soon as the message reached him. But Bilbo’s heart fell, both
at the song and the talk: they sounded much too warlike. The next morning early a company of
spearmen was seen crossing the river, and marching up the valley. They bore with them the green
banner of the Elvenking and the blue banner of the Lake, and they advanced until they stood right
before the wall at the Gate. Again Thorin hailed them in a loud voice: “Who are you that come
armed for war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain?” This time he was
answered.
A tall man stood forward, dark of hair and grim of face, and he cried:
“Hail Thorin! Why do you fence yourself like a robber in his hold? We are not yet foes, and
we rejoice that you are alive beyond our hope. We came expecting to find none living here; yet now
that we are met there is matter for a parley and a council.”
“Who are you, and of what would you parley?”
“I am Bard, and by my hand was the dragon slain and your treasure delivered. Is that not a
matter that concerns you? Moreover I am by right descent the heir of Girion of Dale, and in your
hoard is mingled much of the wealth of his halls and town, which of old Smaug stole. Is not that a
matter of which we may speak? Further in his last battle Smaug destroyed the dwellings of the men
of Esgaroth, and I am yet the servant of their Master. I would speak for him and ask whether you
have no thought for the sorrow and misery of his people. They aided you in your distress, and in
recompense you have thus far brought ruin only, though doubtless undesigned.”
Now these were fair words and true, if proudly and grimly spoken; and Bilbo thought that
Thorin would at once admit what justice was in them. He did not, of course, expect that any one
would remember that it was he who discovered all by himself the dragon’s weak spot; and that was
just as well, for no one ever did. But also he did not reckon with the power that gold has upon
which a dragon has long brooded, nor with dwarvish hearts. Long hours in the past days Thorin had
spent in the treasury, and the lust of it was heavy on him. Though he had hunted chiefly for the
Arkenstone, yet he had an eye for many another wonderful thing that was lying there, about which
were wound old memories of the labours and the sorrows of his race. “You put your worst cause last
and in the chief place,” Thorin answered. “To the treasure of my people no man has a claim,
because Smaug who stole it from us also robbed him of life or home. The treasure was not his that
his evil deeds should be amended with a share of it. The price of the goods and the assistance that
we received of the Lake-men we will fairly pay-in due time. But nothing will we give, not even a
loaf’s worth, under threat of force. While an armed host lies before our doors, we look on you as
foes and thieves.
“It is in my mind to ask what share of their inheritance you would have paid to our kindred,
had you found the hoard unguarded and us slain.” “A just question,” replied Bard. “But you are not
dead, and we are not robbers. Moreover the wealthy may have pity beyond right on the needy that
befriended them when they were in want. And still my other claims remain unanswered.”
“I will not parley, as I have said, with armed men at my gate. Nor at all with the people of the
Elvenking, whom I remember with small kindness. In this debate they have no place. Begone now
ere our arrows fly! And if you would speak with me again, first dismiss the elvish host to the woods
where it belongs, and then return, laying down your arms before you approach the threshold.”
“The Elvenking is my friend, and he has succoured the people of the Lake in their need,though they had no claim but friendship on him,” answered Bard. “We will give you time to repent
your words. Gather your wisdom ere we return!” Then he departed and went back to the camp. Ere
many hours were past, the banner-bearers returned, and trumpeters stood forth and blew a blast:
“In the name of Esgaroth and the Forest,” one cried, “we speak unto Thorin Thrain’s son
Oakenshield, calling himself the King under the Mountain, and we bid him consider well the claims
that have been urged, or be declared our foe. At the least he shall deliver one twelfth portion of the
treasure unto Bard, as the dragon-slayer, and as the heir of Girion. From that portion Bard will
himself contribute to the aid of Esgaroth; but if Thorin would have the friendship and honour of the
lands about, as his sires had of old, then he will give also somewhat of his own for the comfort of
the men of the Lake.” Then Thorin seized a bow of horn and shot an arrow at the speaker. It smote
into his shield and stuck there quivering.
‘”Since such is your answer,” he called in return, “I declare the Mountain besieged. You shall
not depart from it, until you call on your side for a truce and a parley. We will bear no weapons
against you, but we leave you to your gold. You may eat that, if you will!”
With that the messengers departed swiftly, and the dwarves were left to consider their case. So
grim had Thorin become, that even if they had wished, the others would not have dared to find fault
with him; but indeed most of them seemed to share his mind-except perhaps old fat Bombur and
Fili and Kili. Bilbo, of course, disapproved of the whole turn of affairs. He had by now had more
than enough of the Mountain, and being besieged inside it was not at all to his taste.
“The whole place still stinks of dragon,” he grumbled to himself, “and it makes me sick. And
cram is beginning simply to stick in my throat.”
Chapter   
A Thief in the Night
Now the days passed slowly and wearily. Many of the dwarves spent their time piling and
ordering the treasure; and now Thorin spoke of the Arkenstone of Thrain, and bade them eagerly to
look for it in every comer. “For the Arkenstone of my father,” he said, “is worth more than a river of
gold in itself, and to me it is beyond price. That stone of all the treasure I name unto myself, and I
will be avenged on anyone who finds it and withholds it.”
Bilbo heard these words and he grew afraid, wondering what would happen, if the stone was
found-wrapped in an old bundle of tattered oddments that he used as a pillow. All the same he did
not speak of it, for as the weariness of the days grew heavier, the beginnings of a plan had come
into his little head. Things had gone on like this for some time, when the ravens brought news that
Dain and more than five hundred dwarves, hurrying from the Iron Hills, were now within about two
days’ march of Dale, coming from the North-East. “But they cannot reach the Mountain unmarked,”
said Rac, “and I fear lest there be battle in the valley. I do not call this counsel good. Though they
are a grim folk, they are not likely to overcome the host that besets you; and even if they did so,
what will you gain? Winter and snow is hastening behind them. How shall you be fed without the
friendship and goodwill of the lands about you? The treasure is likely to be your death, though the
dragon is no more!”’
But Thorin was not moved. “Winter and snow will bite both men and elves,” he said, “and
they may find their dwelling in the Waste grievous to bear. With my friends behind them and winter
upon them, they will perhaps be in softer mood to parley with.”
That night Bilbo made up his mind. The sky was black and moonless. As soon as it was full
dark, he went to a corner of an inner chamber just within the gate and drew from his bundle a rope,
and also the Arkenstone wrapped in a rag. Then he climbed to the top of the wall. Only Bombur was
there, for it was his turn to watch, and the dwarves kept only one watchman at a time. “It is mighty
cold!” said Bombur. “I wish we could have a fire up here as they have in the camp!”
“It is warm enough inside,” said Bilbo.
“I daresay; but I am bound here till midnight,” grumbled the fat dwarf. “A sorry business
altogether. Not that I venture to disagree with Thorin, may his beard grow ever longer; yet he wasever a dwarf with a stiff neck.” “Not as stiff as my legs,” said Bilbo. “I am tired of stairs and stone
passages. I would give a good deal for the feel of grass at my toes.” “I would give a good deal for
the feel of a strong drink in my throat, and for a soft bed after a good supper!”
“I can’t give you those, while the siege is going on. But it is long since I watched, and I will
take your turn for you, if you like. There is no sleep in me tonight.”
“You are a good fellow, Mr. Baggins, and I will take your offer kindly. If there should be
anything to note, rouse me first, mind you! I will lie in the inner chamber to the left, not far away.”
“Off you go!” said Bilbo. “I will wake you at midnight, and you can wake the next
watchman.” As soon as Bombur had gone, Bilbo put on his ring, fastened his rope, slipped down
over the wall, and was gone. He had about five hours before him. Bombur would sleep (he could
sleep at any time, and ever since the adventure in the forest he was always trying to recapture the
beautiful dreams he had then); and all the others were busy with Thorin. It was unlikely that any,
even Fili or Kili, would come out on the wall until it was their turn. It was very dark, and the road
after a while, when he left the newly made path and climbed down towards the lower course of the
stream, was strange to him. At last he came to the bend where he had to cross the water, if he was to
make for the camp, as he wished. The bed of the stream was there shallow but already broad, and
fording it in the dark was not easy for the little hobbit. He was nearly across when he missed his
footing on a round stone and fell into the cold water with a splash. He had barely scrambled out on
the far bank, shivering and spluttering, when up came elves in the gloom with bright lanterns and
searched for the cause of the noise. “That was no fish!” one said. “There is a spy about. Hide your
lights! They will help him more than us, if it is that queer little creature that is said to be their
servant.”
“Servant, indeed!” snorted Bilbo; and in the middle of his snort he sneezed loudly, and the
elves immediately gathered towards the sound. “Let’s have a light!” he said. “I am here, if you want
me!” and he slipped off his ring, and popped from behind a rock.
They seized him quickly, in spite of their surprise. “Who are you? Are you the dwarves’
hobbit? What are you doing? How did you get so far past our sentinels?” they asked one after
another.
“I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins,” he answered, “companion of Thorin, if you want to know. I know
your king well by sight, though perhaps he doesn’t know me to look at. But Bard will remember
me, and it is Bard I particularly want to see.”
“Indeed!” said they, “and what may be your business?” “Whatever it is, it’s my own, my good
elves. But if you wish ever to get back to your own woods from this cold cheerless place,” he
answered shivering, “you will take me along quiet to a fire, where I can dry-and then you will let
me speak to your chiefs as quick as may be. I have only an hour or two to spare.”
That is how it came about that some two hours after his escape from the Gate, Bilbo was
sitting beside a warm fire in front of a large tent, and there sat too, gazing curiously at him, both the
Elvenking and Bard. A hobbit in elvish armour, partly wrapped in an old blanket, was something
new to them. “Really you know,” Bilbo was saying in his best business manner, “things are
impossible. Personally I am tired of the whole affair. I wish I was back in the West in my own
home, where folk are more reasonable. But I have an interest in this matter-one fourteenth share, to
be precise, according to a letter, which fortunately I believe I have kept.” He drew from a pocket in
his old jacket (which he still wore over his mail), crumpled and much folded, Thorin’s letter that
had been put under the clock on his mantelpiece in May! “A share in the profits, mind you,” he
went on. “I am aware of that. Personally I am only too ready to consider all your claims carefully,
and deduct what is right from the total before putting in my own claim. However you don’t know
Thorin Oakenshield as well as I do now. I assure you, he is quite ready to sit on a heap of gold and
starve, as long as you sit here.” “Well, let him!” said Bard. “Such a fool deserves to starve.” “Quite
so,” said Bilbo. “I see your point of view. At the same time winter is coming on fast. Before long
you will be having snow and what not, and supplies will be difficult – even for elves I imagine.
Also there will be other difficulties. You have not heard of Dain and the dwarves of the Iron Hills?”
“We have, a long time ago; but what has he got to do with us?” asked the king.“I thought as much. I see I have some information you have not got. Dain, I may tell you, is
now less than two days’ march off, and has at least five hundred grim dwarves with him – a good
many of them have had experience in the dreadful dwarf and goblin wars, of which you have no
doubt heard. When they arrive there may be serious trouble.”
“Why do you tell us this? Are you betraying your friends, or are you threatening us?” asked
Bard grimly.
“My dear Bard!” squeaked Bilbo. “Don’t be so hasty! I never met such suspicious folk! I am
merely trying to avoid trouble for all concerned. Now I will make you an offer!!”
“Let us hear it!” they said.
“You may see it!” said he. “It is this!” and he drew forth the Arkenstone, and threw away the
wrapping.
The Elvenking himself, whose eyes were used to things of wonder and beauty, stood up in
amazement. Even Bard gazed marvelling at it in silence. It was as if a globe had been filled with
moonlight and hung before them in a net woven of the glint of frosty stars.
“This is the Arkenstone of Thrain,” said Bilbo, “the Heart of the Mountain; and it is also the
heart of Thorin. He values it above a river of gold. I give it to you. It will aid you in your
bargaining.” Then Bilbo, not without a shudder, not without a glance of longing, handed the
marvellous stone to Bard, and he held it in his hand, as though dazed. “But how is it yours to give?”
he asked at last with an effort. “O well!” said the hobbit uncomfortably. “It isn’t exactly; but, well, I
am willing to let it stand against all my claim, don’t you know. I may be a burglar-or so they say:
personally I never really felt like one-but I am an honest one, I hope, more or less. Anyway I am
going back now, and the dwarves can do what they like to me. I hope you will find it useful.” The
Elvenking looked at Bilbo with a new wonder.
“Bilbo Baggins!” he said. “You are more worthy to wear the armour of elf-princes than many
that have looked more comely in it. But I wonder if Thorin Oakenshield will see it so. I have more
knowledge of dwarves in general than you have perhaps. I advise you to remain with us, and here
you shall be honoured and thrice welcome.”
“Thank you very much I am sure,” said Bilbo with a bow. “But I don’t think I ought to leave
my friends like this, after all we have gone through together. And I promised to wake old Bombur at
midnight, too! Really I must be going, and quickly.”
Nothing they could say would stop him; so an escort was provided for him, and as he went
both the king and Bard saluted him with honour. As they passed through the camp an old man
wrapped in a dark cloak, rose from a tent door where he was sitting and came towards them.
“Well done! Mr. Baggins!” he said, clapping Bilbo on the back. “There is always more about
you than anyone expects!” It was Gandalf. For the first time for many a day Bilbo was really
delighted. But there was no time for all the questions that he immediately wished to ask. “All in
good time!” said Gandalf. “Things are drawing towards the end now, unless I am mistaken. There is
an unpleasant time just in front of you; but keep your heart up! You may come through all right.
There is news brewing that even the ravens have not heard. Good night!”
Puzzled but cheered. Bilbo hurried on. He was guided to a safe ford and set across dry, and
then he said farewell to the elves and climbed carefully back towards the Gate. Great weariness
began to come over him; but it was well before midnight when he clambered up the rope again – it
was still where he had left it. He untied it and hid it, and then he sat down on the wall and wondered
anxiously what would happen next.
At midnight he woke up Bombur; and then in turn rolled himself up in his corner, without
listening to old dwarfs thanks (which he felt he had hardly earned). He was soon fast asleep
forgetting all his worries till the morning. As matter of fact he was dreaming of eggs and bacon.
Chapter   
The Clouds Burst
Next day the trumpets rang early in the camp. Soon a single runner was seen hurrying alongthe narrow path. At a distance he stood and hailed them, asking whether Thorin would now listen to
another embassy, since new tidings had come to hand, and matters were changed.
“That will be Dain!” said Thorin when he heard. “They will have got wind of his coming. I
thought that would alter their mood! Bid them come few in number and weaponless, and I will
hear,” he called to the messenger. About midday the banners of the Forest and the Lake were seen to
be borne forth again. A company of twenty was approaching. At the beginning of the narrow way
they laid aside sword and spear, and came on towards the Gate. Wondering, the dwarves saw that
among them were both Bard and the Elvenking, before whom an old man wrapped in cloak and
hood bore a strong casket of iron-bound wood.
“Hail Thorin!” said Bard. “Are you still of the same mind?” “My mind does not change with
the rising and setting of a few suns,” answered Thorin. “Did you come to ask me idle questions?
Still the elf-host has not departed as I bade! Till then you come in vain to bargain with me.” “Is
there then nothing for which you would yield any of your gold?”
“Nothing that you or your friends have to offer.”
“What of the Arkenstone of Thrain?” said he, and at the same moment the old man opened the
casket and held aloft the jewel. The light leapt from his hand, bright and white in the morning.
Then Thorin was stricken dumb with amazement and confusion. No one spoke for a long
while. Thorin at length broke the silence, and his voice was thick with wrath. “That stone was my
father’s, and is mine,” he said. “Why should I purchase my own?” But wonder overcame him and
he added: “But how came you by the heirloom of my house-if there is need to ask such a question
of thieves?” “We are not thieves,” Bard answered. “Your own we will give back in return for our
own.”
‘How came you by it?” shouted Thorin in gathering rage. “I gave it them!” squeaked Bilbo,
who was peeping over the wall, by now, in a dreadful fright.
“You! You!” cried Thorin, turning upon him and grasping him with both hands. “You
miserable hobbit! You undersized-burglar!” he shouted at a loss for words, and he shook poor Bilbo
like a rabbit.
“By the beard of Durin! I wish I had Gandalf here! Curse him for his choice of you! May his
beard wither! As for you I will throw you to the rocks!” he cried and lifted Bilbo in his arms.
“Stay! Your wish is granted!” said a voice. The old man with the casket threw aside his hood
and cloak. “Here is Gandalf! And none too soon it seems. If you don’t like my Burglar, please don’t
damage him. Put him down, and listen first to what he has to say!”
“You all seem in league!” said Thorin dropping Bilbo on the top of the wall. “Never again
will I have dealings with any wizard or his friends. What have you to say, you descendant of rats?”
“Dear me! Dear me!” said Bilbo. “I am sure this is all very uncomfortable. You may
remember saying that I might choose my own fourteenth share? Perhaps I took it too literally - 
have been told that dwarves are sometimes politer in word than in deed. The time was, all the same,
when you seemed to think that I had been of some service. Descendant of rats, indeed! Is this ail the
service of you and your family that I was promised. Thorin?
Take it that I have disposed of my share as I wished, and let it go at that!” “I will,” said Thorin
grimly. “And I will let you go at that-and may we never meet again!” Then he turned and spoke
over the wall. “I am betrayed,” he said. “It was rightly guessed that I could not forbear to redeem
the Arkenstone, the treasure of my house. For it I will give one fourteenth share of the hoard in
silver and gold, setting aside the gems; but that shall be accounted the promised share of this traitor,
and with that reward he shall depart, and you can divide it as you will. He will get little enough, I
doubt not. Take him, if you wish him to live; and no friendship of mine goes with him.
“Get down now to your friends!” he said to Bilbo, “or I will throw you down.”
“What about the gold and silver?” asked Bilbo.
“That shall follow after, as can be arranged,” said he.
“Get down!”
“Until then we keep the stone,” cried Bard.
“You are not making a very splendid figure as King under the Mountain,” said Gandalf. “Butthings may change yet.”
“They may indeed,” said Thorin. And already, so strong was the bewilderment of the treasure
upon him, he was pondering whether by the help of Dain he might not recapture the Arkenstone and
withhold the share of the reward.
And so Bilbo was swung down from the wall, and departed with nothing for all his trouble,
except the armour which Thorin had given him already. More than one of the dwarves ‘in their
hearts felt shame and pity at his going. “Farewell!” he cried to them. “We may meet again as
friends.” “Be off!” called Thorin. “You have mail upon you, which was made by my folk, and is too
good for you. It cannot be pierced.by arrows; but if you do not hasten, I will sting your miserable
feet. So be swift!” “Not so hasty!” said Bard. “We will give you until tomorrow. At noon we will
return, and see if you have brought from the hoard the portion that is to be set against the stone. If
that is done without deceit, then we will depart, and the elf-host will go back to the Forest. In the
meanwhile farewell!” With that they went back to the camp; but Thorin sent messengers by Rac
telling Dain of what had passed, and bidding him come with wary speed. That day passed and the
night. The next day the wind shifted west, and the air was dark and gloomy. The morning was still
early when a cry was heard in the camp. Runners came in to report that a host of dwarves had
appeared round the eastern spur of the Mountain and was now hastening to Dale. Dain had come.
He had hurried on through the night, and so had come upon them sooner than they had expected.
Each one of his folk was clad in a hauberk of steel mail that hung to his knees, and his legs were
covered with hose of a fine and flexible metal mesh, the secret of whose making was possessed by
Dain’s people.
The dwarves are exceedingly strong for their height, but most of these were strong even for
dwarves. In battle they wielded heavy two-handed mattocks; but each of them had also a short
broad sword at his side and a round shield slung at his back. Their beards were forked and plaited
and thrust into their belts. Their caps were of iron and they were shod with iron, and their faces
were grim. Trumpets called men and elves to arms. Before long the dwarves could be seen coming
up the valley at a great pace. They halted between the river and the eastern spur; but a few held on
their way, and crossing the river drew near the camp; and there they laid down their weapons and
held up their hands in sign of peace. Bard went out to meet them, and with him went Bilbo.
“We are sent from Dain son of Nain,” they said when questioned. “We are hastening to our
kinsmen in the Mountain, since we learn that the kingdom of old is renewed. But who are you that
sit in the plain as foes before defended walls?” This, of. course, in the polite and rather
old-fashioned language of such occasions, meant simply: “You have no business here. We are going
on, so make way or we shall fight you!” They meant to push on between the Mountain and the loop
of the river, for the narrow land there did not seem to be strongly guarded.
Bard, of course, refused to allow the dwarves to go straight on to the Mountain. He was
determined to wait until the gold and silver had been brought out in exchange for the Arkenstone:
for he did not believe that this would be done, if once the fortress was manned with so large and
warlike a company. They had brought with them a great store of supplies; for the dwarves can carry
very heavy burdens, and nearly all of Dain’s folks, in spite of their rapid march, bore huge packs on
their backs in addition to their weapons. They would stand a siege for weeks, and by that time yet
more dwarves might come, and yet more, for Thorin had many relatives. Also they would be able to
reopen and guard some other gate, so that the besiegers would have to encircle the whole mountain;
and for that they had not sufficient numbers.
These were, in fact, precisely their plans (for the raven-messengers had been busy between
Thorin and Dain); but for the moment the way was barred, so after angry words the
dwarf-messengers retired muttering in their beards. Bard then sent messengers at once to the Gate;
but they found no gold or payment. Arrows came forth as soon as they were within shot, and they
hastened back in dismay. In the camp all was now astir, as if for battle; for the dwarves of Dain
were advancing along the eastern bank.
“Fools!” laughed Bard, “to come thus beneath the Mountain’s arm! They do not understand
war above ground, whatever they may know of battle in the mines. There are many of our archersand spearmen now hidden in the rocks upon their right flank. Dwarf-mail may be good, but they
will soon be hard put to it. Let us set on them now from both sides, before they are fully rested!”
But the Elvenking said: “Long will I tarry, ere I begin this war for gold. The dwarves cannot press
us, unless we will, or do anything that we cannot mark. Let us hope still for something that will
bring reconciliation. Our advantage in numbers will be enough, if in the end it must come to
unhappy blows.”
But he reckoned without the dwarves. The knowledge that the Arkenstone was in the hands of
the besiegers burned in their thoughts; also they guessed the hesitation of Bard and his friends, and
resolved to strike while they debated.
Suddenly without a signal they sprang silently forward to attack. Bows twanged and arrows
whistled; battle was about to be joined. Still more suddenly a darkness came on with dreadful
swiftness! A black cloud hurried over the sky. Winter thunder on a wild wind rolled roaring up and
rumbled in the Mountain, and lightning lit its peak. And beneath the thunder another blackness
could be seen whirling forward; but it did not come with the wind, it came from the North, like a
vast cloud of birds, so dense that no light could be seen between their wings.
“Halt!” cried Gandalf, who appeared suddenly, and stood alone, with arms uplifted, between
the advancing dwarves and the ranks awaiting them. “Halt!” he called in a voice like thunder, and
his staff blazed forth with a flash like the lightning. “Dread has come upon you all! Alas! it has
come more swiftly than I guessed. The Goblins are upon you! Bolg of the North is coming. O Dain!
whose father you slew in Moria. Behold! the bats are above his army like a sea of locusts. They ride
upon wolves and Wargs are in their train!” Amazement and confusion fell upon them all. Even as
Gandalf had been speaking the darkness grew. The dwarves halted and gazed at the sky. The elves
cried out with many voices.
“Come!” called Gandalf. “There is yet time for council. Let Dain son of Nain come swiftly to
us!”
So began a battle that none had expected; and it was called the Battle of Five Armies, and it
was very terrible. Upon one side were the Goblins and the wild Wolves, and upon the other were
Elves and Men and Dwarves. This is how it fell out. Ever since the fall of the Great Goblin of the
Misty Mountains the hatred of their race for the dwarves had been rekindled to fury. Messengers
had passed to and fro between all their cities, colonies and strongholds; for they resolved now to
win the dominion of the North. Tidings they had gathered in secret ways; and in all the mountains
there was a forging and an arming. Then they marched and gathered by hill and valley, going ever
by tunnel or under dark, until around and beneath the great mountain Gundabad of the North, where
was their capital, a vast host was assembled ready to sweep down in time of storm unawares upon
the South. Then they learned of the death of Smaug, and joy was in their hearts: and they hastened
night after night through the mountains, and came thus at last on a sudden from the North hard on
the heels of Dain. Not even the ravens knew of their coming until they came out in the broken lands
which divided the Lonely Mountain from the hills behind. How much Gandalf knew cannot be said,
but it is plain that he had not expected this sudden assault.
This is the plan that he made in council with the Elvenking and with Bard; and with Dain, for
the dwarf-lord now joined them: the Goblins were the foes of all, and at their coming all other
quarrels were forgotten. Their only hope was to lure the goblins into the valley between the arms of
the Mountain; and themselves to man the great spurs that struck south and east. Yet this would be
perilous, if the goblins were in sufficient numbers to overrun the Mountain itself, and so attack them
also from behind and above; but there was no time for make any other plan, or to summon any help.
Soon the thunder passed, rolling away to the South-East; but the bat-cloud came, flying lower, over
the shoulder of the Mountain, and whirled above them shutting out the light and filling them with
dread. “To the Mountain!” called Bard. “To the Mountain! Let us take our places while there is yet
time!”
On the Southern spur, in its lower slopes and in the rocks at its feet, the Elves were set; on the
Eastern spur were men and dwarves. But Bard and some of the nimblest of men and elves climbed
to the height of the Eastern shoulder to gain a view to the North. Soon they could see the landsbefore the Mountain’s feet black with a hurrying multitude. Ere long the vanguard swirled round the
spur’s end and came rushing into Dale. These were the swiftest wolf-riders, and already their cries
and howls rent the air afar. A few brave men were strung before them to make a feint of resistance,
and many there fell before the rest drew back and fled to either side. As Gandalf had hoped, the
goblin army had gathered behind the resisted vanguard, and poured now in rage into the valley,
driving wildly up between the arms of the Mountain, seeking for the foe. Their banners were
countless, black and red, and they came on like a tide in fury and disorder.
It was a terrible battle. The most dreadful of all Bilbo’s experiences, and the one which at the
time he hated most – which is to say it was the one he was most proud of, and most fond of
recalling long afterwards, although he was quite unimportant in it. Actually I must say he put on his
ring early in the business, and vanished from sight, if not from all danger. A magic ring of that sort
is not a complete protection in a goblin charge, nor does it stop flying arrows and wild spears; but it
does help in getting out of the way, and it prevents your head from being specially chosen for a
sweeping stroke by a goblin swordsman.
The elves were the first to charge. Their hatred for the goblins is cold and bitter. Their spears
and swords shone in the gloom with a gleam of chill flame, so deadly was the wrath of the hands
that held them. As soon as the host of their enemies was dense in the valley, they sent against it a
shower of arrows, and each flickered as it fled as if with stinging fire. Behind the arrows a thousand
of their spearmen leapt down and charged. The yells were deafening. The rocks were stained black
with goblin blood. Just as the goblins were recovering from the onslaught and the elf-charge was
halted, there rose from across the valley a deep-throated roar. With cries of “Moria!” and “Dain,
Dain!” the dwarves of the Iron Hills plunged in, wielding their mattocks, upon the other side; and
beside them came the men of the Lake with long swords. Panic came upon the Goblins; and even as
they turned to meet this new attack, the elves charged again with renewed numbers. Already many
of the goblins were flying back down the river to escape from the trap: and many of their own
wolves were turning upon them and rending the dead and the wounded. Victory seemed at hand,
when a cry rang out on the heights above. Goblins had scaled the Mountain from the other side and
already many were on the slopes above the Gate, and others were streaming down recklessly,
heedless of those that fell screaming from cliff and precipice, to attack the spurs from above. Each
of these could be reached by paths that ran down from the main mass of the Mountain in the centre;
and the defenders had too few to bar the way for long. Victory now vanished from hope. They had
only stemmed the first onslaught of the black tide.
Day drew on. The goblins gathered again in the valley. There a host of
Wargs came ravening and with them came the bodyguard of Bolg, goblins of huge size with
scimitars of steel. Soon actual darkness was coming into a stormy sky; while still the great bats
swirled about the heads and ears of elves and men, or fastened vampire-like on the stricken. Now
Bard was fighting to defend the Eastern spur, and yet giving slowly back; and the elf-lords were at
bay about their king upon the southern arm, near to the watch-post on Ravenhill. Suddenly there
was a great shout, and from the Gate came a trumpet call. They had forgotten Thorin! Part of the
wall, moved by levers, fell outward with a crash into the pool. Out leapt the King under the
Mountain, and his companions followed him. Hood and cloak were gone; they were in shining
armour, and red light leapt from their eyes. In the gloom the great dwarf gleamed like gold in a
dying fire.
Rocks were buried down from on high by the goblins above; but they held on. leapt down to
the falls’ foot, and rushed forward to battle. Wolf and rider fell or fled before them. Thorin wielded
his axe with mighty strokes, and nothing seemed to harm him.
“To me! To me! Elves and Men! To me! O my kinsfolk!” he cried, and his voice shook like a
horn in the valley.
Down, heedless of order, rushed all the dwarves of Dain to his help. Down too came many of
the Lake-men, for Bard could not restrain them; and out upon the other side came many of the
spearmen of the elves. Once again the goblins were stricken in the valley; and they were piled in
heaps till Dale was dark and hideous with their corpses. The Wargs were scattered and Thorin droveright against the bodyguards of Bolg. But he could not pierce their ranks. Already behind him
among the goblin dead lay many men and many dwarves, and many a fair elf that should have lived
yet long ages merrily in the wood. And as the valley widened his onset grew ever slower. His
numbers were too few. His flanks were unguarded. Soon the attackers were attacked, and they were
forced into a great ring, facing every way, hemmed all about with goblins and wolves returning to
the assault. The bodyguard of Bolg came howling against them, and drove in upon their ranks like
waves upon cliffs of sand. Their friends could not help them, for the assault from the Mountain was
renewed with redoubled force, and upon either side men and elves were being slowly beaten down.
On all this Bilbo looked with misery. He had taken his stand on Ravenhill among the
Elves-partly because there was more chance of escape from that point, and partly (with the more
Tookish part of his mind) because if he was going to be in a last desperate stand, he preferred on the
whole to defend the Elvenking. Gandalf, too, I may say, was there, sitting on the ground as if in
deep thought, preparing, I suppose, some last blast of magic before the end. That did not seem far
off. “It will not be long now,” thought Bilbo, “before the goblins win the Gate, and we are all
slaughtered or driven down and captured. Really it is enough to make one weep, after all one has
gone through. I would rather old Smaug had been left with all the wretched treasure, than that these
vile creatures should get it, and poor old Bombur, and Balin and Fili and Kili and all the rest come
to a bad end; and Bard too, and the Lake-men and the merry elves. Misery me! I have heard songs
of many battles, and I have always understood that defeat may be glorious. It seems very
uncomfortable, not to say distressing. I wish I was well out of it.” The clouds were torn by the wind,
and a red sunset slashed the West.
Seeing the sudden gleam in the gloom Bilbo looked round. He gave a great cry:
he had seen a sight that made his heart leap, dark shapes small yet majestic against the distant
glow.
“The Eagles! The Eagles!” he shouted. “The Eagles are coming!” Bilbo’s eyes were seldom
wrong. The eagles were coming down the wind, line after line, in such a host as must have gathered
from all the eyries of the North.
“The Eagles! the Eagles!” Bilbo cried, dancing and waving his arms. If the elves could not see
him they could hear him. Soon they too took up the cry, and it echoed across the valley. Many
wondering eyes looked up, though as yet nothing could be seen except from the southern shoulders
of the Mountain.
“The Eagles!” cried Bilbo once more, but at that moment a stone hurtling from above smote
heavily on his helm, and he fell with a crash and knew no more.
Chapter   
The Return Journey
When Bilbo came to himself, he was literally by himself. He was lying on the flat stones of
Ravenhill, and no one was near. A cloudless day, but cold, was broad above him. He was shaking,
and as chilled as stone, but his head burned with fire.
“Now I wonder what has happened?” he said to himself. “At any rate I am not yet one of the
fallen heroes; but I suppose there is still time enough for that!”
He sat up painfully. Looking into the valley he could see no living goblins. After a while as
his head cleared a little, he thought he could see elves moving in the rocks below. He rubbed his
eyes. Surely there was a camp still in the plain some distance off; and there was a coming and going
about the Gate? Dwarves seemed to be busy removing the wall. But all was deadly still. There was
no call and no echo of a song. Sorrow seemed to be in the air. “Victory after all, I suppose!” he said,
feeling his aching head. “Well, it seems a very gloomy business.”
Suddenly he was aware of a man climbing up and coming towards him.
“Hullo there!” he called with a shaky voice. “Hullo there! What news?” “What voice is it that
speaks among the stones?” said the man halting and peering about him not far from where Bilbo sat.
Then Bilbo remembered his ring! “Well I’m blessed!” said he. “This invisibility has itsdrawbacks after all. Otherwise I suppose I might have spent a warm and comfortable night in bed!”
“It’s me, Bilbo Baggins, companion of Thorin!” he cried, hurriedly taking off the ring.
“It is well that I have found you!” said the man striding forward. “You are needed and we
have looked for you long. You would have been numbered among the dead, who are many, if
Gandalf the wizard had not said that your voice was last heard in this place. I have been sent to look
here for the last time. Are you much hurt?”
“A nasty knock on the head, I think,” said Bilbo. “But I have a helm and a hard skull. All the
same I feel sick and my legs are like straws.” “I will carry you down to the camp in the valley,” said
the man, and picked him lightly up.
The man was swift and sure-footed. It was not long before Bilbo was set down before a tent in
Dale; and there stood Gandalf, with his arm in a sling. Even the wizard had not escaped without a
wound; and there were few unharmed in all the host.
When Gandalf saw Bilbo, he was delighted. “Baggins!” he exclaimed. “Well I never! Alive
after all –   am glad! I began to wonder if even your luck would see you through! A terrible
business, and it nearly was disastrous. But other news can wait. Come!” he said more gravely. “You
are called for;” and leading the hobbit he took him within the tent.
“Hail! Thorin,” he said as he entered. “I have brought him.” There indeed lay Thorin
Oakenshield, wounded with many wounds, and his rent armour and notched axe were cast upon the
floor. He looked up as Bilbo came beside him.
“Farewell, good thief,” he said. “I go now to the halls of waiting to sit beside my fathers, until
the world is renewed. Since I leave now all gold and silver, and go where it is of little worth, I wish
to part in friendship from you, and I would take back my words and deeds at the Gate.”
Bilbo knelt on one knee filled with sorrow. “Farewell, King under the
Mountain!” he said. “This is a bitter adventure, if it must end so; and not a mountain of gold
can amend it. Yet I am glad that I have shared in your perils – that has been more than any Baggins
deserves.”
“No!” said Thorin. “There is more in you of good than you know, child of the kindly West.
Some courage and some wisdom, blended in measure. If more of us valued food and cheer and song
above hoarded gold, it would be a merrier world. But sad or merry, I must leave it now. Farewell!”
Then Bilbo turned away, and he went by himself, and sat alone wrapped in a blanket, and, whether
you believe it or not, he wept until his eyes were red and his voice was hoarse. He was a kindly
little soul. Indeed it was long before he had the heart to make a joke again. “A mercy it is,” he said
at last to himself, “that I woke up when I did. I wish Thorin were living, but I am glad that we
parted in kindness. You are a fool, Bilbo Baggins, and you made a great mess of that business with
the stone; and there was a battle, in spite of all your efforts to buy peace and quiet, but I suppose
you can hardly be blamed for that.”
All that had happened after he was stunned, Bilbo learned later; but it gave him more sorrow
than joy, and he was now weary of his adventure. He was aching in his bones for the homeward
journey. That, however, was a little delayed, so in the meantime I will tell something of events. The
Eagles had long had suspicion of the goblins’ mustering; from their watchfulness the movements in
the mountains could not be altogether hid. So they too had gathered in great numbers, under the
great Eagle of the Misty Mountains; and at length smelling battle from afar they had come speeding
down the gale in the nick of time. They it was who dislodged the goblins from the mountain -slopes,
casting them over precipices, or driving them down shrieking and bewildered among their foes. It
was not long before they had freed the Lonely Mountain, and elves and men on either side of the
valley could come at last to the help of the battle below.
But even with the Eagles they were still outnumbered. In that last hour Beorn himself had
appeared – no one knew how or from where. He came alone, and in bear’s shape; and he seemed to
have grown almost to giant-size in his wrath. The roar of his voice was like drums and guns; and he
tossed wolves and goblins from his path like straws and feathers. He fell upon their rear, and broke
like a clap of thunder through the ring. The dwarves were making a stand still about their lords upon
a low rounded hill. Then Beorn stooped and lifted Thorin, who had fallen pierced with spears, andbore him out of the fray. Swiftly he returned and his wrath was redoubled, so that nothing could
withstand him, and no weapon seemed to bite upon him. He scattered the bodyguard, and pulled
down Bolg himself and crushed him. Then dismay fell on the Goblins and they fled in all directions.
But weariness left their enemies with the coming of new hope, and they pursued them closely, and
prevented most of them from escaping where they could. They drove many of them into the
Running River, and such as fled south or west they hunted into the marshes about the Forest River;
and there the greater part of the last fugitives perished, while those that came hardly to the
Wood-elves’ realm were there slain, or drawn in to die in the trackless dark of Mirkwood. Songs
have said that three parts of the goblin warriors of the North perished on that day, and the mountains
had peace for many a year.
Victory had been assured before the fall of night, but the pursuit was still on foot, when Bilbo
returned to the camp; and not many were in the valley save the more grievously wounded.
“Where are the Eagles?” he asked Gandalf that evening, as he lay wrapped in many warm
blankets.
“Some are in the hunt,” said the wizard, “but most have gone back to their eyries. They would
not stay here, and departed with the first light of morning. Dain has crowned their chief with gold,
and sworn friendship with them for ever.”
“I am sorry. I mean, I should have liked to see them again,” said Bilbo sleepily; “perhaps I
shall see them on the way home. I suppose I shall be going home soon?”
“As soon as you like,” said the wizard.
Actually it was some days before Bilbo really set out. They buried Thorin deep beneath the
Mountain, and Bard laid the Arkenstone upon his breast.
“There let it lie till the Mountain falls!” he said. “May it bring good fortune to all his folk that
dwell here after!” Upon his tomb the Elvenking then laid Orcrist, the elvish sword that had been
taken from Thorin in captivity. It is said in songs that it gleamed ever in the dark if foes approached,
and the fortress of the dwarves could not be taken by surprise. There now Dain son of Nain took up
his abode, and he became King under the Mountain, and in time many other dwarves gathered to his
throne in the ancient halls. Of the twelve companions of Thorin, ten remained. Fili and Kili had
fallen defending him with shield and body, for he was their mother’s elder brother. The others
remained with Dain; for Dain dealt his treasure well. There was, of course, no longer any question
of dividing the hoard in such shares as had been planned, to Balin and Dwalin, and Dori and Nori
and Ori, and Oin and Gloin, and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur-or to Bilbo. Yet a fourteenth share of
all the silver and gold, wrought and unwrought, was given up to Bard; for Dain said: “We will
honour the agreement of the dead, and he has now the Arkenstone in his keeping.”
Even a fourteenth share was wealth exceedingly great, greater than that of many mortal kings.
From that treasure Bard sent much gold to the Master of Lake-town; and he rewarded his followers
and friends freely. To the Elvenking he gave the emeralds of Girion, such jewels as he most loved,
which Dain had restored to him. To Bilbo he said: “This treasure is as much yours as it is mine;
though old agreements cannot stand, since so many have a claim in its winning and defence. Yet
even though you were willing to lay aside all your claim, I should wish that the words of Thorin, of
which he repented, should not prove true: that we should give you little. I would reward you most
richly of all.”
“Very kind of you,” said Bilbo. “But really it is a relief to me. How on earth should I have got
all that treasure home without war and murder all along the way, I don’t know. And I don’t know
what I should have done with it when I got home. I am sure it is better in your hands.” In the end he
would only take two small chests, one filled with silver, and the other with gold, such as one strong
pony could carry. “That will be quite as much as I can manage,” said he.
At last the time came for him to say good-bye to his friends. “Farewell, Balin!” he said; “and
farewell, Dwalin; and farewell Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, Gloin, Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur! May your
beards never grow thin!” And turning towards the Mountain he added: “Farewell Thorin
Oakenshield! And Fili and Kili! May your memory never fade!”
Then the dwarves bowed low before their Gate, but words stuck in their throats. “Good-byeand good luck, wherever you fare!” said Balin at last. “If ever you visit us again, when our halls are
made fair once more, then the feast shall indeed be splendid!”
“If ever you are passing my way,” said Bilbo, “don’t wait to knock! Tea is at four; but any of
you are welcome at any time!”
Then he turned away.
The elf-host was on the march;. and if it was sadly lessened, yet many were glad, for now the
northern world would be merrier for many a long day. The dragon was dead, and the goblins
overthrown, and their hearts looked forward after winter to a spring of joy. Gandalf and Bilbo rode
behind the Elvenking, and beside them strode Beorn, once again in man’s shape, and he laughed
and sang in a loud voice upon the road. So they went on until they drew near to the borders of
Mirkwood, to the north of the place where the Forest River ran out.
Then they halted, for the wizard and Bilbo would not enter the wood, even though the king
bade them stay a while in his halls. They intended to go along the edge of the forest, and round its
northern end in the waste that lay between it and the beginning of the Grey Mountains. It was a long
and cheerless road, but now that the goblins were crushed, it seemed safer to them than the dreadful
pathways under the trees. Moreover Beorn was going that way too.
“Farewell! O Elvenking!” said Gandalf. “Merry be the greenwood, while the world is yet
young! And merry be all your folk!”
“Farewell! O Gandalf!” said the king. “May you ever appear where you are most needed and
least expected! The oftener you appear in my halls the better shall I be pleased!”
“I beg of you,” said Bilbo stammering and standing on one foot, “to accept this gift!” and he
brought out a necklace of silver and pearls that Dain had given him at their parting.
“In what way have I earned such a gift, O hobbit?” said the king. “Well, er, I thought, don’t
you know,” said Bilbo rather confused, “that, er, some little return should be made for your, er,
hospitality. I mean even a burglar has his feelings. I have drunk much of your wine and eaten much
of your bread.”
“I will take your gift, O Bilbo the Magnificent!” said the king gravely. “And I name you
elf-friend and blessed. May your shadow never grow less (or stealing would be too easy)!
Farewell!”
Then the elves turned towards the Forest, and Bilbo started on his long road home.
He had many hardships and adventures before he got back. The Wild was still the Wild, and
there were many other things in it in those days besides goblins; but he was well guided and well
guarded-the wizard was with him, and Beorn for much of the way-and he was never in great danger
again. Anyway by mid-winter Gandalf and Bilbo had come all the way back, along both edges of
the Forest, to the doors of Beorn’s house; and there for a while they both stayed. Yule-tide was
warm and merry there; and men came from far and wide to feast at Beorn’s bidding. The goblins of
the Misty Mountains were now few and terrified, and hidden in the deepest holes they could find;
and the Wargs had vanished from the woods, so that men went abroad without fear. Beorn indeed
became a great chief afterwards in those regions and ruled a wide land between the mountains and
the wood; and it is said that for many generations the men of his line had the power of taking bear’s
shape, and some were grim men and bad, but most were in heart like Beorn, if less in size and
strength. In their day the last goblins were hunted from the Misty Mountains and a new peace came
over the edge of the Wild. It was spring, and a fair one with mild weathers and a bright sun, before
Bilbo and Gandalf took their leave at last of Beorn, and though he longed for home. Bilbo left with
regret, for the flowers of the gardens of Beorn were m springtime no less marvellous than in high
summer. At last they came up the long road, and reached the very pass where the goblins had
captured them before. But they came to that high point at morning, and looking backward they saw
a white sun shining over the out-stretched lands. There behind lay Mirkwood, blue in the distance,
and darkly green at the nearer edge even in the spring. There far away was the Lonely Mountain on
the edge of eyesight. On its highest peak snow yet unmelted was gleaming pale. “So comes snow
after fire, and even dragons have their ending!” said Bilbo, and he turned his back on his adventure.
The Tookish part was getting very tired, and the Baggins was daily getting stronger. “I wish nowonly to be in my own arm-chair!” he said.
Chapter   
The Last Stage
It was on May the First that the two came back at last to the brink of the valley of Rivendell,
where stood the Last (or the First) Homely House.
Again it was evening, their ponies were tired, especially the one that carried the baggage; and
they all felt in need of rest. As they rode down the steep path, Bilbo heard the elves still singing in
the trees, as if they had not stopped since he left; and as soon as their riders came down into the
lower glades of the wood they burst into a song of much the same kind as before.
This is something like it:
“The dragon is withered,
His bones are now crumbled;
His armour is shivered,
His splendour is humbled!
Though sword shall be rusted,
And throne and crown perish
With strength that men trusted
And wealth that they cherish,
Here grass is still growing,
And leaves are yet swinging,
The white water flowing,
And elves are yet singing
Come! Tra-la-la-lally!
Come back to the valley!
The stars are far brighter
Than gems without measure,
The moon is far whiter
Than silver in treasure:
The fire is more shining
On hearth in the gloaming
Than gold won by mining,
So why go a-roaming?
O! Tra-la-la-lally
Come back to the Valley.
O! Where are you going,
So late in returning?
The river is flowing,
The stars are all burning!
O! Whither so laden,
So sad and so dreary?
Here elf and elf-maiden
Now welcome the weary
With Tra-la-la-lally
Come back to the Valley,
Tra-la-la-lally
Fa-la-la-lally
Fa-la!”
Then the elves of the valley came out and greeted them and led them across the water to the
house of Elrond. There a warm welcome was made them, and there were many eager ears that
evening to hear the tale of their adventures. Gandalf it was who spoke, for Bilbo was fallen quietand drowsy. Most of the tale he knew, for he had been in it, and had himself told much of it to the
wizard on their homeward way or in the house of Beorn; but every now and again he would open
one eye, and listen, when a part of the story which he did not yet know came in. It was in this way
that he learned where Gandalf had been to; for he overheard the words of the wizard to Elrond. It
appeared that Gandalf had been to a great council of the white wizards, masters of lore and good
magic; and that they had at last driven the Necromancer from his dark hold in the south of
Mirkwood.
“Ere long now,” Gandalf was saying, “The Forest will grow somewhat more wholesome. The
North will be freed from that horror for many long years, I hope. Yet I wish he were banished from
the world!”
“It would be well indeed,” said Elrond; “but I fear that will not come about in this age of the
world, or for many after.”
When the tale of their joumeyings was told, there were other tales, and yet more tales, tales of
long ago, and tales. of new things, and tales of no time at all, till Bilbo’s head fell forward on his
chest, and he snored comfortably in a corner.
He woke to find himself in a white bed, and the moon shining through an open window.
Below it many elves were singing loud and clear on the banks of the stream.
“Sing all ye joyful, now sing all together?
The wind’s in the free-top, the wind’s in the heather;
The stars are in blossom, the moon is in flower,
And bright are the windows of Night in her tower.
Dance all ye joyful, now dance all together!
Soft is the grass, and let foot be like feather!
The river is silver, the shadows are fleeting;
Merry is May-time, and merry our meeting.
Sing we now softly, and dreams let us weave him!
Wind him in slumber and there let us leave him!
The wanderer sleepeth. Now soft be his pillow!
Lullaby! Lullaby! Alder and Willow!
Sigh no more Pine, till the wind of the morn!
Fall Moon! Dark be the land!
Hush! Hush! Oak, Ash, and Thorn!
Hushed be all water, till dawn is at hand!”
“Well, Merry People!” said Bilbo looking out. “What time by the moon is this? Your lullaby
would waken a drunken goblin! Yet I thank you.” “And your snores would waken a stone dragon –
yet we thank you,” they answered with laughter. “It is drawing towards dawn, and you have slept
now since the night’s beginning. Tomorrow, perhaps, you will be cured of weariness.”
“A little sleep does a great cure in the house of Elrond,” said he; “but I will take all the cure I
can get. A second good night, fair friends!” And with that he went back to bed and slept till late
morning. Weariness fell from him soon in that house, and he had many a merry jest and dance, early
and late, with the elves of the valley. Yet even that place could not long delay him now, and he
thought always of his own home. After a week, therefore, he said farewell to Elrond, and giving him
such small gifts as he would accept, he rode away with Gandalf. Even as they left the valley the sky
darkened in the West before them, and wind and rain came up to meet them.
“Merry is May-time!” said Bilbo, as the rain beat into his face. “But our back is to legends
and we are coming home. I suppose this is a first taste of it.”
“There is a long road yet,” said Gandalf.
“But it is the last road,” said Bilbo. They came to the river that marked the very edge of the
borderland of the Wild, and to the ford beneath the steep bank, which you may remember. The
water was swollen both with the melting of the snows at the approach of summer, and with the
daylong rain; but they crossed with some difficulty, and pressed forward, as evening fell, on the last
stage of their journey. This was much as it had been before, except that the company was smaller,and more silent; also this time there were no trolls. At each point on the road Bilbo recalled the
happenings and the words of a year ago-it seemed to him more like ten-so that, of course, he
quickly noted the place where the pony had fallen in the river, and they had turned aside for their
nasty adventure with Tom and Bert and Bill. Not far from the road they found the gold of the trolls,
which they had buried, still hidden and untouched. “I have enough to last me my time,” said Bilbo,
when they had dug it up. “You had better take this, Gandalf. I daresay you can find a use for it.”
“Indeed I can!” said the wizard. “But share and share alike! You may find you have more
needs than you expect.”
So they put the gold in bags and slung them on the ponies, who were not at all pleased about
it. After that their going was slower, for most of the time they walked. But the land was green and
there was much grass through which the hobbit strolled along contentedly. He mopped his face with
a red silk handkerchief-no! not a single one of his own had survived, he had borrowed this one from
Elrond -for now June had brought summer, and the weather was bright and hot again.
As all things come to an end, even this story, a day came at last when they were in sight of the
country where Bilbo had been born and bred, where the shapes of the land and of the trees were as
well known to him as his hands and toes. Coming to a rise he could see his own Hill in the distance,
and he stopped suddenly and said:
“Roads go ever ever on,
Over rock and under tree,
By caves where never sun has shone,
By streams that never find the sea;
Over snow by winter sown,
And through the merry flowers of June,
Over grass and over stone,
And under mountains in the moon.
Roads go ever ever on
Under cloud and under star,
Yet feet that wandering have gone
Turn at last to home afar.
Eyes that fire and sword have seen
And horror in the halls of stone
Look at last on meadows green
And trees and hills they long have known.”
Gandalf looked at him. “My dear Bilbo!” he said. “Something is the matter with you! You are
not the hobbit that you were.”
And so they crossed the bridge and passed the mill by the river and came right back to Bilbo’s
own door. “Bless me! What’s going on?” he cried. There was a great commotion, and people of all
sorts, respectable and unrespectable, were thick round the door, and many were going in and out-not
even wiping their feet on the mat, as Bilbo noticed with annoyance. If he was surprised, they were
more surprised still. He had arrived back in the middle of an auction! There was a large notice in
black and red hung on the gate, stating that on June the Twenty-second Messrs. Grubb, Grubb, and
Bun-owes would sell by auction the effects of the late Bilbo Baggins Esquire, of Bag-End,
Underhill, Hobbiton. Sale to commence at ten o’clock sharp. It was now nearly lunch-time, and
most of the things had already been sold, for various prices from next to nothing to old songs (as is
not unusual at auctions). Bilbo’s cousins the Sackville-Bagginses were, in fact, busy measuring his
rooms to see if their own furniture would fit. In short Bilbo was “Presumed Dead,” and not
everybody that said so was sorry to find the presumption wrong.
The return of Mr. Bilbo Baggins created quite a disturbance, both under the Hill and over the
Hill, and across the Water; it was a great deal more than a nine days’ wonder. The legal bother,
indeed, lasted for years. It was quite a long time before Mr. Baggins was in fact admitted to be alive
again.The people who had got specially good bargains at the Sale took a deal of convincing; and in
the end to sav  time Bilbo had to buy back quite a lot of his own furniture. Many of his silver
spoons mysteriously disappeared and were never accounted for. Personally he suspected the
Sackville-Bagginses. On their side they never admitted that the returned Baggins was genuine, and
they were not on friendly terms with Bilbo ever after. They really had wanted to live inhis nice
hobbit-hole so very much.
Indeed Bilbo found he had lost more than spoons – he had lost his reputation. It is true that for
ever after he remained an elf-friend, and had the honour of dwarves, wizards, and all such folk as
ever passed that way; but he was no longer quite respectable. He was in fact held by all the hobbits
of the neighbourhood to be ‘queer’-except by his nephews and nieces on the Took side, but even
they were not encouraged in their friendship by their elders. I am sorry to say he did not mind. He
was quite content; and the sound of the kettle on his hearth was ever after more musical than it had
been even in the quiet days before the Unexpected Party. His sword he hung over the mantelpiece.
His coat of mail was arranged on a stand in the hall (until he lent it to a Museum). His gold and
silver was largely spent in presents, both useful and extravagant – which to a certain extent accounts
for the affection of his nephews and his nieces. His magic ring he kept a great secret, for he chiefly
used it when unpleasant callers came. He took to writing poetry and visiting the elves; and though
many shook their heads and touched their foreheads and said “Poor old Baggins!” and though few
believed any of his tales, he remained very happy to the end of his days, and those were
extraordinarily long.
One autumn evening some years afterwards Bilbo was sitting in his study writing his memoirs
– he thought of calling them “There and Back Again, a Hobbit’s Holiday” – when there was a ring
at the door. It was Gandalf and a dwarf; and the dwarf was actually Balin.
“Come in! Come in!” said Bilbo, and soon they were settled in chairs by the fire. If Balin
noticed that Mr. Baggins’ waistcoat was more extensive (and had real gold buttons), Bilbo also
noticed that Balm’s beard was several inches longer, and his jewelled belt was of great
magnificence. They fell to talking of their times together, of course, and Bilbo asked how things
were going in the lands of the Mountain. It seemed they were going very well. Bard had rebuilt the
town in Dale and men had gathered to him from the Lake and from South and West, and all the
valley had become tilled again and rich, and the desolation was now filled with birds and blossoms
in spring and fruit and feasting in autumn. And Lake-town was refounded and was more prosperous
than ever, and much wealth went up and down the Running River; and there was friendship in those
parts between elves and dwarves and men. The old Master had come to a bad end. Bard had given
him much gold for the help of the Lake-people, but being of the kind that easily catches such
disease he fell under the dragon-sickness, and took most of the gold and fled with it, and died of
starvation in the Waste, deserted by his companions. “The new Master is of wiser kind,” said Balin,
“and very popular, for, of course, he gets most of the credit for the present prosperity. They are
making songs which say that in his day the rivers run with gold.” “Then the prophecies of the old
songs have turned out to be true, after a fashion!” said Bilbo.
“Of course!” said Gandalf. “And why should not they prove true? Surely you don’t disbelieve
the prophecies, because you had a hand in bringing them about yourself? You don’t really suppose,
do you, that all your adventures and escapes were managed by mere luck, just for your sole benefit?
You are a very fine person, Mr. Baggins, and I am very fond of you; but you are only quite a little
fellow in a wide world after all!”
“Thank goodness!” said Bilbo laughing, and handed him the tobacco-jar.
Herbert George Wells was born in      in Bromley, England
into a family where there was little money to spare; his father ran
a small shop and played cricket professionally and his mother
worked as a housekeeper. The family s financial situation meant
that Wells had to work from the age of fourteen to support
himself through education. His success at school won him a free
place to study at a college of science in London, after which he
became a science teacher. His poor health made life difficult,
though, and he struggled to keep his full-time job while trying to
write in his spare time.
He married twice. His first wife was Isabel Mary Wells, but the
marriage was not a success. Three years later he left her for Amy
Catherine Robbins, a former pupil. Wells often criticised the
institution of marriage, and he had relationships with several
other women, the most important being the writer Rebecca
West. By      Wells had become a full-time writer and lived
comfortably from his work. He travelled a lot and kept homes in
the south of France and in London, where he died in     .
Wells wrote about    works of fiction and collections of
stories; many books and shorter works on political, social and
historical matters; three books for children, and one about his
own life. His most important early works established him as the
father of science fiction and it is for these books that he is
remembered. Best known are The Time Machine (    ), The
Invisible Man (    ), The War of the Worlds (    ) and The First
Men in the Moon (    ). In all these works he shows a remarkable
imagination. He seemed to have the ability to make intelligent
guesses about future scientific developments; he described travel
underwater and by air, for example, at a time when such journeys
seemed to be pure fiction.
Wells began to realise that his science fiction, although highly
successful, was not about the lives of real people, and the subject
matter of his later works of fiction is rooted in a world of which
he had personal experience. Love and Mr Lewisham (    ) tells
the story of a struggling teacher. The History of Mr Polly (    )
describes the adventures of a shopkeeper who frees himself from
his work by burning down his own shop and running away to
start a new life. In these and other books he shows a sympathetic
interest in, and understanding for, the lives of ordinary people
that were rarely present in fiction at the time. One of Wells s most
successful works is Tono-Bungay (    ), a story of dishonesty and
greed involving the production and sale of a medicine that, for a
time, brings wealth and respect to its inventor. ,
For centuries storytellers have been interested in the idea of
invisible beings, with all the related possibilities and dangers.
Wells s interest in the subject is from a scientific rather than a
magical point of view, and he uses the main character in The
Invisible Man to put across his message that scientific progress can
be dangerous in the wrong hands. Apart from the idea of
invisibility, the rest of the book is very realistic. It is set in a real
place known to Wells; the characters are ordinary and believable.
All of this makes the less believable central idea easier to accept.
Much of the book is written with a light, humorous touch, but it
becomes more serious as the story develops.
The story begins on a snowy winter s day in the village of
Iping. A mysterious stranger arrives at the Coach and Horses Inn,
wrapped up from head to foot so that no part of his body is
visible. The lady of the inn, Mrs Hall, is pleased to have a guest at
this time of year, but her pleasure turns to doubt and finally to
fear as she discovers her strange visitor s secret. When he begins
to make trips out of the inn, the people of the village and
surrounding area are affected by the appearance and behaviour of
the Invisible Man and they connect his presence with robberies
IV
vand strange events in the area. It is the scientist, Dr Kemp, who
the Invisible Man turns to for help and understanding, and who
learns the secret of the strange man s invisibility. When the
Invisible Man finds that he was wrong to have trusted Kemp, his
actions become wilder and more violent and it is clear that the
story will not end happily.
Chapter  
The Strange Man s Arrival
The stranger came early one winter s day in February, through a
biting wind and the last snowfall of the year. He walked over the
hill from Bramblehurst Station, and carried a little black bag in
his thickly gloved hand. He was wrapped up from head to foot,
and the edge of his soft grey hat hid every part of his face except
the shiny point of his nose; the snow had piled itself against his
shoulders and chest. He almost fell into the Coach and Horses,
more dead than alive, and threw his bag down.  A fire,  he cried,
 in the name of human kindness! A room and a fire!  He stamped
his feet, shook the snow from his coat and followed Mrs Hall, the
innkeeper s wife, into her parlour. There he arranged to take a
room in the inn and gave her two pounds.
Mrs Hall lit the fire and left him there while she went to
prepare him a meal with her own hands. To have a guest at Iping
in the winter time was an unusual piece of good fortune, and she
was determined to show that she deserved it.
She put some meat on the fire to cook, told Millie, the
servant, to get the room ready for the stranger, and carried the
cloth, plates and glasses into the parlour, and began to lay the
table. Although the fire was burning brightly, she was surprised to
see that her visitor still wore his hat and coat, and stood with his
back to her, looking out of the window at the falling snow in the
yard.
His gloved hands were held behind him, and he seemed to be
thinking deeply. She noticed that some melted snow was falling
onto the floor from his shoulders.
 Can I take your hat and coat, sir,  she said,  and dry them in
the kitchen? 
 No,  he replied, without turning.
VI
 She was not sure that she had heard him, and was about to
repeat the question.
He turned his head and looked at her over his shoulder.  I
would rather keep them on,  he said firmly; and she noticed that
he wore big blue glasses, and had a bushy beard over his coat
collar that almost hid his face.
 Very well, sir,  she said.  As you like. Very soon the room will
be warmer. 
He made no answer, and turned his face away from her again,
and Mrs Hall, feeling that her talk was unwelcome, finished
laying the table quickly, and hurried out of the room. When she
returned he was still standing there like a man of stone, his collar
turned up, the edge of his hat turned down, almost hiding his
face and ears. She put down the eggs and meat noisily, and called
rather than said to him:
He held his napkin over the lower part of his face, so that his
mouth and jaws were completely hidden. But it was not that
which surprised Mrs Hall. It was the fact that the top of his head
above his blue glasses was covered by a white bandage, and that
another covered his ears, leaving nothing of his face to be seen
except his pink, pointed nose. It was bright pink, and shining, just
as it had been at first. He wore a dark brown jacket, with a high
black collar turned up about his neck. His thick black hair stuck
out below and between the bandages. This bandaged head was so
unlike what she had expected that for a moment she stood
staring at it.
 Your lunch is served, sir. 
 Thank you,  he answered. He did not move until she was
closing the door. Then he turned round and walked eagerly up to
the table.
Mrs Hall filled the butter dish in the kitchen, and took it to
the parlour.
She knocked and entered at once. As she did so her visitor
moved quickly, so that she only saw something white
disappearing behind the table. He seemed to be picking up
something from the floor. She put down the butter dish on the
table, and noticed that the visitor s hat and coat were hanging
over a chair in front of the fire.
 I suppose I may have them to dry now?  she said, in a voice
that could not be refused.
 Leave the hat,  said her visitor, and turning, she saw he had
raised his head and was looking at her.
For a moment she stood looking at him, too surprised to
speak. He did not remove the napkin, but remained holding it, as she
saw now, with a brown-gloved hand, and looking at her from
behind his dark glasses.
 Leave the hat,  he said, through the white cloth.
She began to feel less afraid. She put the hat on the chair again
by the fire.
 I didn t know, sir,  she began, that— And she stopped.
 Thank you,  he said shortly, looking from her to the door, and
then at her again.
 I ll have it nicely dried, sir, at once,  she said, and carried his
coat out of the room. She looked at his bandaged head and dark
glasses again as she was going out of the door; but he was still
holding his napkin in front of his face. She was shaking a little as
she closed the door behind her.  My goodness!  she whispered.
She went straight to the kitchen, and did not even think of
asking Millie what she was doing now.
The visitor sat and listened to her footsteps. He looked out of
the window before he removed his napkin from his face and
began his meal again. He took a mouthful, looked again at the
window, then rose and, taking the napkin in his hand, walked
across the room and pulled down the blind. This darkened the
room. He returned more happily to the table and his meal.
    The poor man s had an accident, or an operation or
something,  said Mrs Hall.  What a shock those bandages gave
me. 
She put some more coal on the fire, and hung the traveller s
coat to dry.  And the glasses! Why, he doesn t look human at all.
And holding that napkin over his mouth all the time. Talking
through it! . . . Perhaps his mouth was hurt too. 
She turned round, suddenly remembering something.  Oh
dear!  she said,  Haven t you done those potatoes yet, Millie? 
When Mrs Hall went to clear away the stranger s lunch, her
idea that his mouth must also have been damaged in an accident
was strengthened, for though he was smoking a pipe, all the time
that she was in the room he kept the lower part of his face
covered. He sat in the corner with his back to the window, and
spoke now, having eaten and drunk and being comfortably
warmed through, less impatiently than before. The light of the
fire shone red in his glasses.
 I have some boxes,  he said,  at Bramblehurst Station. How can
they be brought here? 
Mrs Hall answered his question, and then said, It s a steep road
by the hill, sir. That s where a carriage was turned over, a year
ago and more. A gentleman was killed. Accidents, sir, happen in a
moment, don t they? 
 They do. 
 But people take long enough to get well, sir, don t they?
There was my sister s son, Tom, who cut his arm with a scythe -
he fell on it out in the fields. He was three months tied up, sir.
You d hardly believe it. I ve been afraid of scythes ever since, sir. 
 I can quite understand that,  said the visitor.
 We were afraid that he d have to have an operation, he was so
bad, sir. 
The visitor laughed suddenly.
 Was he? 
,
 
 He was, sir. And it wasn t funny for those who had to nurse
him as I did, my sister being so busy with her little ones. There
were bandages to do, sir, and bandages to undo. So that if I may
say, sir- 
 Will you get me some matches?  said the visitor quite
suddenly.  My pipe is out. 
Mrs Hall stopped. It was certainly rude of him after she had
told him so much. But she remembered the two pounds, and
went for the matches.
 Thanks,  he said shortly, as she put them down, and turned his
back upon her and looked out of the window again. Clearly he
did not like talking about bandages.
The visitor remained in the room until four o clock, without
giving Mrs Hall an excuse for a visit. He was very quiet during
that time: perhaps he sat in the growing darkness smoking by the
firelight — perhaps he slept.
Once or twice a listener might have heard him: for five
minutes he could be heard walking up and down the room. He
seemed to be talking to himself. Then he sat down again in the
armchair.
Chapter  
Mr Henfrey Has a Shock
At four o clock, when it was fairly dark, and Mrs Hall was trying
to find the courage to go in and ask her visitor if he would like
some tea, Teddy Henfrey, the clock-mender, came into the bar.
 Good evening, Mrs Hall,  said he,  this is terrible snowy
weather for thin boots! 
Mrs Hall agreed, and then noticed he had his bag with him.
 Now you re here, Mr Teddy  said she, I d be glad if you d look at
the old clock. It s going, and it strikes loud and clear, but the hour
hand does nothing except point to six. 
  Would you mind, sir, if this man came to look at the clock,
sir?  she said.
 Look at the clock?  he said, staring round sleepily and
speaking over his hand; and then, more fully awake, Certainly. 
Mrs Hall went away to get a lamp, and he rose and stretched
himself. Then came the light, and at the door Mr Teddy Henfrey
was met by this bandaged person. He was, he said later,  quite
shocked .
 Good afternoon,  said the stranger, staring at him — as Mr
Henfrey said —  like a fish .
 I hope,  said Mr Henfrey,  that you don t mind. 
 Not at all,  said the stranger.  Though I understood,  he said,
turning to Mrs Hall,  that this room was to be mine for my own
use. 
 I thought, sir,  said Mrs Hall,  you d like the clock— 
 Certainly,  said the stranger,  certainly; but at other times I
would like to be left alone. 
He turned round with his back to the fireplace, and put his
hands behind his back.  And soon,  he said,  when the clock is mended, I think I should like to have some tea. But not until
then. 
Mrs Hall was about to leave the room — she did not try to talk
this time — when her visitor asked her if she had done anything
about his boxes at Bramblehurst. She told him that the carrier
could bring them over the next day.
 You are certain that is the earliest?  he asked. She was quite
sure.
 I should explain,  he added, but I was really too cold and tired
to do so before, that I am a scientist. 
 Indeed, sir,  said Mrs Hall, respectfully.
 And I need things from the boxes for my work. 
 Of course, sir. 
 My reason for coming to Iping,  he went on slowly,  was a
desire to be alone. I do not wish to be disturbed in my work.
Besides my work, an accident— 
 I thought so,  said Mrs Hall to herself.
 —makes it necessary for me to be quiet. My eyes are
sometimes so weak and painful that I have to shut myself up in
the dark for several hours and lock myself in. Sometimes — now
and then. Not at present, certainly. At such times the least thing,
even a stranger coming into the room, gives me great pain. It s
important that this should be understood. 
 Certainly, sir,  said Mrs Hall.  And if I might ask— 
 That, I think, is all,  said the stranger quietly.
Mrs Hall said no more.
After Mrs Hall had left the room, he remained standing in
front of the fire and watched the clock being mended. Mr
Henfrey worked with the lamp close to him, and the green shade
threw a bright light onto his hands and onto the frame and
wheels, and left the rest of the room in shadow. He took longer
than he needed to remove the works, hoping to have some talk
with the stranger. But the stranger stood there, perfectly silent
   
And, leading the way, she went across to the parlour door and
knocked.
As she opened the door, she saw her visitor seated in the
armchair in front of the fire, asleep, it seemed, with his bandaged
head leaning on one side. The only light in the room was from
the fire. Everything seemed hidden in shadows. But for a second
it seemed to her that the man she was looking at had a great,
wide-open mouth, a mouth that swallowed the whole of the
lower part of his face. It was too ugly to believe, the white head,
the staring glasses — and then a great hole. He moved, sat up
straight and put up his hand. She opened the door wide, so that
the room was lighter, and she saw him more clearly, with the
napkin held to his face, just as she had seen him hold it before.
The shadows, she thought, had tricked her.and still. So still that it frightened Henfrey. He felt alone in the
room and looked up, and there, grey and shadowy, were the
bandaged head and large dark glasses staring straight in front of
them. It was so strange to Henfrey that for a minute they stood
staring at each other. Then Henfrey looked down again. He
would have liked to say something. Should he say that the
weather was very cold for the time of the year?
hard at the furniture, just to show that the stranger wasn t master
there. When he went to bed, he told Mrs Hall to look very
closely at the stranger s boxes when they came next day..
 You mind your own business, Hall,  said Mrs Hall,  and I ll
mind mine. 
But in the middle of the night she woke up dreaming of great
white heads that came after her, at the end of long necks, and
with big black eyes. But being a sensible woman, she turned over
and went to sleep again.
 The weather-  he began.
 Why don t you finish and go?  said the stiff figure, angrily.  All
you ve got to do is to fix the hour hand. You re simply wasting
time. 
 Certainly, sir - one minute more. I forgot . . .  And Mr
Henfrey finished and left the room.
 Really!  said Mr Henfrey to himself, walking down the village
street through the falling snow.  A man must mend a clock
sometimes, surely  And then, Can t a man look at you? Ugly! 
And yet again,  It seems he can t. If you were wanted by the
police, you couldn t be more wrapped and bandaged. 
At the street corner he saw Hall, who had recently married
the lady of the inn.  Hello, Teddy  said Hall, as he passed.
 You ve got a strange visitor!  said Teddy.
Hall stopped.  What did you say?  he asked.
 A strange man is staying at the inn,  said Teddy. And he
described Mrs Hall s guest.  It looks strange, doesn t it? I d like to
see a man s face if I had him staying in my house. But women are
so foolish with strangers. He s taken your rooms, and he hasn t
even given a name. 
 Is that so?  said Hall, rather stupidly.
 Yes,  said Teddy.  And he s got a lot of boxes coming
tomorrow, so he says. 
Teddy walked on, easier in his mind.
And after the stranger had gone to bed, which he did at about
half past nine, Mr Hall went into the parlour and looked very  Come along with those boxes,  he said.   I ve been waiting
long enough.  And he came down the steps, as if to pick up the
smaller case.
As soon as Fearenside s dog caught sight of him, however, it
began to growl, and when he ran down the steps it went straight
for his hand. Hall cried out and jumped back, for he was not very
brave with dogs, and Fearenside shouted, Lie down!  and reached
for his whip.
They saw that the dog s teeth had missed the stranger s hand,
   
Chapter  
The Thousand and One Bottles
That was how, on the ninth day of February, the stranger came to
Iping village. Next day his boxes arrived. There were two trunks,
indeed, such as any man might have, but also there was a box of
books — big, fat books, of which some were in handwriting you
couldn t read — and    or more boxes and cases full of glass
bottles, or so it seemed to Hall, as he pulled at the paper packing
material. The stranger, covered up in hat, coat and gloves, came
out impatiently to meet the carriage, while Hall was talking to
Fearenside, the carrier, before helping to bring the boxes in. The
stranger did not notice Fearenside s dog, who was smelling at
Hall s legs.heard a kick, saw the dog jump and bite the stranger s leg, and
heard the sound of his trousers tearing. Then Fearenside s whip
cut into his dbg, who, crying with pain, ran under the wheels of
the carriage. It was all done in a quick half minute. No one
spoke, everyone shouted. The stranger looked at his torn glove
and at his leg, then turned and ran up the steps into the inn. They
heard him go across the passage and up the stairs to his bedroom.
 Come here, you!  said Fearenside to his dog, climbing off the
carriage with his whip in his hand, while the dog watched him
through the wheel.  Come here!  he repeated.  You d better! 
Hall stood staring.  He was bitten,  he said.  I d better go and
see him.  And he went to find the stranger. He met his wife in the
passage.  The carrier s dog bit him,  he told her.
He went straight upstairs, pushed open the stranger s door and
went in.
The blind was down and the room dark. He caught sight of a
strange thing, a handless arm that seemed to be waving towards
him, and a face of three large dark spots on white. Then he was
struck in the chest and thrown out of the room, and the door was
shut in his face and locked. All this happened so fast that it gave
him no time to see anything clearly. A waving of shapes, a blow
and a noise like a gun. There he stood in the dark little passage,
wondering what he had seen.
After a few minutes he came back to the little group that had
formed outside the inn. There was Fearenside telling the story all
over again for the second time; there was Mrs Hall saying his dog
had no right to bite her guests; there was Huxter, the shopkeeper
from over the road, asking questions; Sandy Wadgers looking
serious and women and children, all talking.
Mr Hall, staring at them from the steps and listening, found it
hard to believe that he had seen anything very strange happen
upstairs.
He wants no help, he says,  he said in answer to his wife s
  
question.  We d better take his luggage in. 
 He ought to have his leg looked at immediately,  said Mr
Huxter.
 I d shoot the dog, that s what I d do,  said a lady in the group.
Suddenly the dog began growling again.
 Come along,  cried an angry voice in the doorway, and there
stood the stranger, with his coat collar turned up and the edge of
his hat bent down.
 The sooner you get those things in, the better I ll be pleased. 
His trousers and gloves had been changed.
 Were you hurt, sir?  said Fearenside.  I m very sorry the dog— 
 Not at all,  said the stranger.  It didn t even break the skin.
Hurry up with those things. 
As soon as the first box was carried into the parlour, the
stranger began to unpack it eagerly, and from it he brought out
bottles - little fat bottles, small thin bottles, blue bottles, bottles
with round bodies and thin necks, large green glass bottles, large
white glass bottles, wine bottles, bottles, bottles, bottles — and put
them in rows on the table under the window, round the floor, on
the shelf — everywhere. Case after case was full of bottles; he
emptied six of the cases and piled the packing material high on
the floor and table.
As soon as the cases were empty, the stranger went to the
window and set to work, not troubling in the least about the
paper, the fire which had gone out, the box of books outside or
the boxes and other things that had gone upstairs.
When Mrs Hall took his dinner in to him, he did not hear her
until she had cleared away most of the paper and had put the
food on the table.
Then he half turned his head, and turned it away again. But
she saw he had taken off his glasses; they were beside him on the
table, and he seemed to her to have no eyes. He put on his
glasses again, and then turned and faced her. She was about to
  complain about the paper on the floor, but he spoke first.
 I wish you wouldn t come in without knocking,  he said,
angrily as usual.
 I knocked, but- 
 But in my work I cannot have any - I must ask you— 
 Certainly, sir. You can turn the key if you want to, you know.
Any time. 
 A very good idea,  said the stranger.
 This paper, sir. If I might say— 
 Don t. If the paper is a problem, put it on the bill. 
He was so strange, standing there, with his bottles and his bad
temper, that Mrs Hall was quite afraid. But she was a strong-
minded woman.  Then I should like to know, sir, what you
consider— 
 A shilling - put a shilling on my bill. Surely a shilling s
enough? 
 Very well,  said Mrs Hall, taking up the tablecloth and
beginning to spread it over the table.
 If you re satisfied, of course- 
He turned his back on her and sat down.
All afternoon he worked with the door locked, and almost in
silence. But once there was a noise of bottles ringing together, as
though the table had been hit, and the crash of glass thrown
down, and then came the sound of quick walking up and down
the room. Fearing something was the matter, she went to the
door and listened, not wanting to knock.
I can t go on,  he was shouting;  I can t go on! Three hundred
thousand, four hundred thousand! It may take me all my life!...
Patience! Patience, indeed! . . . Fool! Fool! 
There was a noise of boots on the brick floor of the bar, and
Mrs Hall could not stay to hear any more. When she returned,
the room was silent again except for the faint sound of his chair
and now and then of a bottle. It was all over; the stranger had returned to his work.
Later, when she took in his tea, she saw broken glass in the
corner of the room. She pointed at it.
 Put it on the bill,  he said.  In God s name don t worry me! If
there s damage done, put it on the bill.  And he went on with his
writing.
 I ll tell you something,  said Fearenside. It was late in the
afternoon, and they were in a little inn outside Iping.
 Well?  said Teddy Henfrey.
 This man you re speaking of, that my dog bit. Well — he s
black. At least his legs are. I saw through the tear in his trousers
and the tear in his glove. You d have expected a sort of pink to
show, wouldn t you? Well — there was just blackness. I tell you he s
as black as my hat. 
 Good heavens!  said Henfrey.  It s a very strange case indeed.
Why, his nose is as pink as paint! 
 That s true,  said Fearenside.  I know that. And I tell you what
I m thinking. That man s black here and white there - in pieces.
And he daren t show it. He s a kind of half-breed. I ve heard of
such things before. And it s common with horses, as anyone can
see. 
     
Chapter  
Mr Cuss Talks to the Stranger
The stranger rarely left the inn by day, but in the evening he
would go out, wrapped up to the eyes, whether the weather was
cold or not, and he chose the loneliest paths. His glasses and
bandaged face under his great black hat would appear suddenly
out of the darkness to one or two workmen going home, and
one night Teddy Henfrey, coming out of the Dog and Duck, was
frightened by the stranger s white, round head (he was walking
hat in hand) lit by the sudden light of the open inn door. ItCuss could hear swearing inside the parlour. He knocked at
the door and entered. at the open door of the parlour. Then she heard the stranger
laughing quietly, and his footsteps came across the room. She
could not see his face from where she stood. The parlour door
shut loudly, and the place was silent again.
Cuss went straight up the village to Bunting, the vicar.
 Am I mad?  Cuss began, as he entered the little study.  Do I
look like a madman? 
 What s happened?  asked the vicar.
 That man at the inn ... 
 Well? 
 Give me something to drink,  said Cuss, and he sat down.
When his nerves had been steadied by a glass of wine he said,
 As I went in, he put his hands in his pockets and then he sat
down in his chair. I told him I d heard he took an interest in
scientific things. He said, "Yes." I tried to talk to him. He got
quite angry ...Well, he told me that he had had a piece of paper.
It was important, most important, most valuable. A list of..."Was
it medicine?" I asked. "Why do you want to know?" was his
answer. In any case, this paper was of great value. He had read it,
put it down on the table and looked away. Then the wind had
lifted it and blown it into the fire. He saw it go up the chimney.
Just as he told me that, he lifted his arm. The sleeve was empty. I
could see right up it. What can keep a sleeve up and open if
there s nothing in it?
 Please forgive me for breaking in on you,  said Cuss, and then
the door closed and shut out Mrs Hall.
She could hear the sound of voices for the next ten minutes,
then a cry of surprise, a moving of feet, a chair being knocked
over, a laugh, quick steps to the door, and Cuss appeared, his face
white, his eyes staring over his shoulder. He left the door open
behind him and, without looking at her, went across the hall and
down the steps, and she heard his feet hurrying along the road.
He carried his hat in his hand. She stood behind the bar, looking  "How can you move an empty sleeve like that?" I asked.
 "Empty sleeve?" he said.
 "Yes," I said,"an empty sleeve."
 "It s an empty sleeve, is it? You saw it was an empty sleeve?"
He stood up. I stood up too. He came towards me in three very
slow steps, and stood quite close.
 "You said it was an empty sleeve?" he said.
 "Certainly," I said.
 Then very quietly he pulled his sleeve out of his pocket again,
     
seemed doubtful whether the stranger hated boys more than they
hated him, but there was certainly hatred enough on both sides.
Of course they talked about him in Iping, and were unable to
decide what his business was. Mrs Hall said he  discovered things ,
that he had had an accident, and that he did not like people to
see the ugly marks on his body. Some said that he was a criminal
hiding from the police, and others that he was part white and
part black, and  if he chose to show himself at fairs he would
make a great deal of money . A few thought that he was simply
and harmlessly mad. And in the end some of the women began
to think that he was a spirit or a magician.
No one liked him, for he was always angry and never friendly.
They drew to one side as he passed down the village street, and
when he had gone by young men would put their coat collars up
and turn the edges of their hats down, and follow him for a joke.
Cuss, the doctor, was interested in the bandages and bottles. All
through April and May he wanted to talk to the stranger, and at
last he could bear it no longer and went to visit him. He was
surprised to find that Mr Hall did not know his guest s name.
 He gave a name,  said Mrs Hall - this was untrue -  but I
didn t hear it properly.  She thought it seemed silly not to know
the man s name.and raised his arm towards me, as though he would show it to me
again. He did it very, very slowly. I looked at it, holding my
breath. "Well?" I said, clearing my throat; "there s nothing in it."
 I was beginning to feel frightened. I could see right down it.
He put it out straight towards me, slowly, slowly —just like that -
until it was   inches from my face. Just imagine seeing an empty
sleeve come at you like that! And then- 
 Well? 
 Something — it felt exactly like a finger and a thumb — pulled
my nose. 
Bunting began to laugh.
 There wasn t anything
shout at the "there".  You
was so shocked that I hit
ran out of the room I left
there!  said Cuss, his voice rising to a
may laugh if you like, but I tell you I
his sleeve hard and turned round and
him— 
Cuss stopped. It was easy to see that he was afraid. He turned
round in a helpless way, and took a second glass of wine.  When I
hit his sleeve,  he said,  I tell you, it felt exactly like hitting an arm.
And there wasn t an arm! There wasn t any arm at all! 
Mr Bunting thought it over.  It s a very strange story,  he said.
He looked very serious.  It really is a very strange story indeed. 
Chapter  
The Robbery at the Vicarage
The robbery at the Vicarage happened in the early hours of
Whit Monday* the day when Iping held its spring fair. Mrs
Bunting, it seems, woke up suddenly in the stillness that comes
before the sunrise, with a strong feeling that the door of their
bedroom had opened and closed. She did not wake her husband
* Whit Monday: the day after Whit Sunday (orWhitsun), which is an important
day of celebration for Christians and falls on the seventh Sunday after Easter.
  
at first, but sat up in bed listening. She then clearly heard the
sound of bare feet coming out of the next room and walking
along the passage towards the stairs. As soon as she felt sure of
this, she woke her husband as quietly as she could. He did not
light the lamp, but put on his glasses and a pair of soft shoes, and
went out of the bedroom to listen. He heard quite clearly
someone moving in the study downstairs, and then the sound of
a violent sneeze.
At that he returned to his bedroom, armed himself with the
poker, and went downstairs as silently as he could. Mrs Bunting
stood at the top of the stairs.
It was about four o clock, and the last darkness of the night
had passed. There was a faint light in the passage; the study door
stood half open. Everything was quiet and still, except the sound
of the stairs under Mr Bunting s feet, and the slight movements in
the study. He heard a drawer being opened, and a sound of papers.
Then came some swearing, and a match was struck, and the study
was full of yellow light. Mr Bunting was now in the hall, and
through the half-open door he could see the desk, an open
drawer, and a lamp burning on the desk. But he could not see the
thief. He stood there considering what to do, and Mrs Bunting,
her face white with fear, walked slowly downstairs after him.
They heard the noise of coins, and knew that the thief had
found the housekeeping money — two pounds and ten shillings in
gold and silver. That sound made Mr Bunting very angry. Holding
the poker firmly, he ran into the room, closely followed by Mrs
Bunting.
 Come on, my dear,  and then Mr Bunting stopped. The room
was perfectly empty.
But they knew that they had heard someone moving in the
room. They stood still for half a minute. Then Mrs Bunting went
across the room and looked behind the curtain, while Mr Bunting
looked under the desk and up the chimney, and pushed the poker
  up into the darkness. Then they stood still looking at each other
When Mr Hall came downstairs in the early hours of Whit
Monday, he noticed that the stranger s door was open and the
front door unlocked. He remembered holding the lamp while Mrs Hall locked it the night before. At the sight of the front door
he stopped; then he went upstairs again. He knocked at the
stranger s door. There was no answer. He knocked again; then
pushed the door wide open and entered.
It was as he expected. The bed, the room too, was empty. And
what was still more strange, on the bed and chair were scattered
the clothes, the only clothes so far as he knew, and the bandages
of their guest. His big hat was hanging on the bedpost.
As Mr Hall stood there he heard his wife s voice coming from
the kitchen.
He turned and hurried down to her.
 Jenny,  he said,  he s not in his room and the front door is
unlocked. 
At first Mrs Hall did not understand, but as soon as she did she
determined to see the empty room for herself. Hall went first.  If
he s not there, his clothes are. And what is he doing without his
clothes? 
As they came out of the kitchen they both thought they heard
the front door open and shut but, seeing it closed and seeing
nothing there, neither said a word to the other about it at the
time. Mrs Hall passed her husband in the passage, and ran on first
upstairs. Someone on the staircase sneezed. Mr Hall, following six
steps behind, thought that he heard her sneeze; she, going first,
thought that he was sneezing. She threw open the door and
stood looking round the room.  What a strange thing!  she said.
She heard a cough close behind her, as it seemed, and, turning,
was surprised to see her husband some distance away on the top
stair. But in another moment he was beside her. She put her hand
under the bedcovers.
 Cold,  she said.  He s been up an hour or more. 
At that point, a most unexpected thing happened. The
bedcovers pulled themselves together into a pile, and then
jumped violently off the bed. It was just as if a hand had thrown
     
questioningly.
 I was quite sure-  said Mrs Bunting.
 The lamp!  said Mr Bunting.  Who lit the lamp? 
 The drawer!  said Mrs Bunting.  And the money s gone! 
She went quickly to the doorway.
 Who in the world- 
There was a loud sneeze in the passage. They rushed out, and as
they did so the kitchen door closed!
 Bring the lamp!  said Mr Bunting, and led the way.
As he opened the kitchen door, he saw the back door opening.
The garden beyond was lit by the first, faint light of sunrise. He
was certain that nothing went out of the door. It stood open for a
moment, and then closed with a loud bang. They searched outside
for a minute or more before they came back into the kitchen.
The place was empty. They locked the back door and
examined the kitchen and all the rooms thoroughly. There was no
one to be found in the house, though they searched upstairs and
down.
When daylight came, the vicar and his wife were still searching;
by the unnecessary light of the dying lamp.
 Of all the surprising events, this is-  began the vicar for the
twentieth time.
 My dear,  said Mrs Bunting,  there s the servant coming down.
Just wait here until she has gone into the kitchen, and then go
upstairs. 
Chapter  
T h e Furniture T h a t Went M a dthem to one side. Then the stranger s hat jumped off the bedpost,
flew through the air, and came straight at Mrs Hall s face. Next, a
piece of soap flew from the washstand. Finally the chair threw
the stranger s coat and trousers carelessly onto the floor, laughed
in a voice very like the stranger s, turned itself round so that its
four legs pointed at Mrs Hall, seemed to take aim at her for a
moment, and then moved quickly towards her. She cried out and
turned, and the chair legs landed gently but firmly against her
back and pushed her and Mr Hall out of the room. The door shut
loudly and was locked. The chair and the bed seemed to be
dancing for a moment, and then suddenly everything was still.
Mrs Hall was left almost fainting in Mr Hall s arms in the
passage. It was with the greatest difficulty that Mr Hall and
Millie, now dressed, succeeded in getting her downstairs.
 Spirits,  said Mrs Hall.  I know it s spirits. I ve read about them
in the papers.Tables and chairs dancing. 
 Lock him out,  she went on.  Don t let him come in again. I
half guessed . . . I might have known. With those eyes and that
bandaged head, and never going to church on Sunday. And all
those bottles — more than it s right for anyone to have. He s put
the spirits into the furniture . . . My good old furniture! My poor
dear mother used to sit in that chair when I was a little girl. And
now it rises against me! 
They sent Millie across the street through the golden five
o clock sunshine to wake up Mr Sandy Wadgers, who was clever
and might be able to help them.
 Magic,  said Mr Wadgers and came to the inn greatly troubled.
They wanted him to lead the way upstairs to the room, but he
didn t seem to be in any hurry. He preferred to talk in the
passage. Then Mr Huxter came and joined in the talk. There was
a great deal of talking, but nothing was done.
 Let s have the facts first,  said Mr Sandy Wadgers.  Let s be sure
we d be acting perfectly right in breaking that door open. 
  
And suddenly the door of the room upstairs opened by itself,
and they saw coming down the stairs the wrapped-up figure of
the stranger staring more blackly than ever through those large
glasses. He came down stiffly and slowly, staring all the time; he
walked across the passage, staring, and then stopped.
He entered the parlour, and suddenly and angrily shut the
door in their faces.
Not a word was spoken until the noise of the door had died
away. They looked at one another.
 Well, I ve never seen anything like it!  said Mr Wadgers, more
troubled than ever.
 If I were you, I d go in and ask him about it,  Mr Wadgers
advised Mr Hall.  I d demand an explanation. 
It took some time to persuade Mr Hall to do it. At last he
knocked, opened the door, and got as far as:
 Excuse me— 
 Go to the devil!  said the stranger,  and shut that door after
you. 
And that was all.
Chapter  
The Stranger Shows His Face
It was half past five when the stranger went into the little parlour
of the Coach and Horses, and there he remained until nearly
midday, with the blinds down and the door shut, and nobody
went near him.
All that time he could have eaten nothing. Three times he rang
his bell, the third time loud and long, but no one answered him.
 Telling us to go to the devil, indeed!  said Mrs Hall. Soon came
the story of the robbery at the Vicarage, and that started them
thinking. Hall went off with Wadgers to find Mr Shuckleforth,
the lawyer, and take his advice. No one went upstairs, and no one
  knew what the stranger was doing. Now and then he walked
rapidly up and down, and they heard him swearing, tearing
paper, breaking bottles.
The little group grew bigger. Mrs Huxter came over; some
young fellows joined them. There was a stream of unanswered
questions. Young Archie Harker tried to look under the closed
curtains. He could see nothing, but he was soon joined by other
boys.
And inside in the darkness of the parlour, the stranger, hungry
and afraid, hidden in his uncomfortable hot clothes, stared
through his dark glasses at his paper, or shook his dirty little
bottles or swore at the boys outside the windows. In the corner
by the fireplace lay the pieces of several broken bottles, and the
sharp smell of a strange gas filled the air.
At about midday he suddenly opened his parlour door and
stood looking at the three or four people in the bar.  Mrs Hall,  he
said. Somebody went and called for her.
She soon appeared, a little short of breath, and so even more
angry. Hall was still out. She had had time to think now, and had
brought the stranger s unpaid bill.
 Why wasn t my breakfast laid?  he asked.  Why haven t you
prepared my meals and answered my bell? Do you think I can
live without eating? 
 Why isn t my bill paid?  said Mrs Hall.  That s what I want to
know. 
 I told you three days ago I was expecting some money— 
 I told you three days ago I wasn t going to wait. You can t
complain if your breakfast waits a bit, when my bill s been
waiting for five days, can you? 
The stranger swore in answer.
 And I d thank you, sir, if you d keep your swearing to yourself,
sir,  said Mrs Hall.
 Look here, my good woman—  he began.  Don t call me your good woman,  said Mrs Hall.
 I ve told you my money hasn t come. 
 Money indeed!  said Mrs Hall.
 Still, in my pocket— 
 You told me three days ago that you hadn t anything but a
pound s worth of silver on you. 
 Well, I ve found some more. 
 And where did you find that?  said Mrs Hall.
He stamped his foot.  What do you mean?  he said.
 I mean where did you find it?  said Mrs Hall.  And before I
take any money, or get any breakfasts, or do any such things, you
must tell me one or two things that I don t understand, and that
nobody understands, and that everybody is very anxious to
understand. I want to know what you have been doing to my
chair upstairs, and I want to know why you went out of your
bedroom and how you got in again. Those who stay here come
in by the doors — that s the rule of this house, and you didn t do
that, and what I want to know is how you did come in. And I
want to know— 
Suddenly the stranger raised his gloved hands, stamped his
foot, and said  Stop!  so loudly that he silenced her at once.
 You don t understand,  he said,  who I am or what I am. I ll
show you. By heaven! I ll show you.  He put his open hand over
his face and then took it away. His face became a black hole.
 Here,  he said. He stepped forward and handed Mrs Hall
something which she, staring at his face, took without thinking.
Then, when she saw what it was, she screamed loudly and
dropped it. The nose — it was the stranger s nose, pink and
shining! — rolled on the floor.
Then he removed his glasses, and everyone in the bar breathed
deeply. He took off his hat, and tore at his beard and bandages.
It was worse than anything they had ever seen. Mrs Hall,
open-mouthed with terror, ran to the door of the house.
     Everyone began to move. They had expected burns, wounds,
something ugly, but they saw - nothing! The bandages and false
hair flew across the passage into the bar. Everyone fell over
everyone else down the steps. For the man who stood there
shouting was a man up to the shoulders, and then — nothing!
People down in the village heard shouts and saw the people
rushing out of the inn. They saw Mrs Hall fall down, and Mr
Henfrey jump, so as not to fall over her, and then they heard the
frightful cries of Millie, who, running quickly from the kitchen at
the noise, had come on the headless stranger from behind. Then
her cries stopped suddenly.
Everyone in the village street, old and young, about    or
more of them, collected in a crowd around the inn door.
 What was he doing? 
 Ran at them with a knife. 
 I heard the girl. 
 No head, I tell you. 
 Nonsense. 
 Took off his bandages. 
Everyone spoke at once. Suddenly Mr Hall appeared, very red
and determined, then Mr Bobby Jaffers, the village policeman,
and then the serious Mr Wadgers.
Mr Hall marched up the steps, walked straight to the door of
the parlour and found it open.
 Policeman,  he said, do your duty. 
Jaffers marched in, Hall next, Wadgers last. They saw the
headless figure facing them, with a half-eaten piece of bread in
one gloved hand and a piece of cheese in the other.
 That s him,  said Hall.
 What the devil s this?  came in an angry voice from above the
collar of the strange figure.
 Well, Mister,  said Jaffers,  I ve got to arrest you, head or no
head.   Keep off!  said the stranger, jumping back.
He took off his glove and with it struck Jaffers in the face. In
another moment Jaffers had seized him by the handless wrist, and
caught his invisible throat. He got a hard kick that made him
shout with pain, but he kept his hold. A chair stood in the way,
and fell with a crash as they came down together.
 Get hold of his feet,  said Jaffers between his teeth to the other
men.
When he tried to obey this order, Mr Hall received a great
kick in the chest that finished him for a time; and Mr Wadgers,
seeing that the headless stranger had rolled over and got on top of
Jaffers, went backwards towards the door, and so fell against Mr
Huxter and another man coming to help the policeman. Four
bottles fell and broke on the floor, filling the room with a
powerful smell.
     
 I give in,  said the stranger, though he had thrown Jaffers
down; and in another moment he stood up, shaking, breathless. A
strange thing, he looked, without head or hands. His voice
seemed to come out of nothing.
Jaffers also got up.
The stranger ran his arm down his coat, and the buttons to
which his empty sleeve pointed became undone. Then he bent
down and seemed to touch his shoes.
 Why!  said Huxter suddenly,  That s not a man at all. It s just
empty clothes. Look! You can see down his collar and his shirt. I
could put my arm— 
He stretched out his hand; it seemed to meet something in the
air, and he pulled it back with a sharp cry of surprise.
 I wish you d keep your fingers out of my eye,  shouted the
voice in anger.  The fact is, I m all here — head, hands, legs, and all
the rest of it, but it happens I m invisible. But that s no reason
why you should put your fingers in my eye, is it? 
The suit of clothes, now all unbuttoned, stood up.Several other men had now come into the room, so that it was
crowded.
 Invisible, eh?  said Huxter.  Who ever heard of such a- 
 It s strange, perhaps, but it s not a crime. Why am I attacked by
a policeman in this way? 
 Ah! That s different,  said Jaffers.  I can t see you, but I have
orders to arrest you, not because you can t be seen, but because a
house has been robbed. 
 Well? 
 And it looks as if— 
 Nonsense,  said the Invisible Man.
 I hope so, sir. But I ve got my orders. 
Suddenly the man sat down, and before anyone could think of
stopping him, he had thrown off all his clothes - all except his
shirt.
 Here, stop that,  said Jaffers suddenly.  Hold him,  he cried.  If
he gets his shirt off- 
 Hold him,  shouted everyone, and there was a rush at the
white shirt, which was now all that could be seen of the stranger.
The shirt sleeve struck a blow in Hall s face that sent him
backward into old Toothsome, the gravedigger, and in another
moment the shirt was lifted up, just like a shirt that is being
pulled over a man s head. Jaffers tore at it but only helped to pull
it off. He was struck in the mouth out of the air, and lifted his
stick and hit Teddy Henfrey hard on the top of his head.
-Look out!  cried everybody, hitting everywhere at nothing.
Hold him! Shut the door! Don t let him go! I ve got something!
Here he is!  Everybody was being hit at once, falling on one
another. Sandy Wadgers opened the door and they fell out. The
hitting went on. One man had a tooth broken, another a swollen
ear. Jaffers was struck under the jaw. He caught at something hard
that stood between him and Huxter. Then the whole mass of
struggling, excited men fell out into the crowded hall.
  
The battle moved quickly to the house door. There were
excited cries of  Hold him! ,  Invisible! , and a young man, a
stranger to the place, rushed in, caught something, missed his
hold, and fell over another man s body. Halfway across the road a
woman fainted as something pushed past her, a dog ran growling
into Huxter s yard, and with that the Invisible Man was gone.
For a moment people stood, not knowing what to do. And
then they ran, scattered as the wind scatters dead leaves.
But Jaffers lay quite still, face upward and knees bent.
Chapter  
On the Road
Mr Thomas Marvel, a tramp, had removed his boots and was
sitting by the roadside airing his feet and looking sadly at his toes.
They were the best boots he had worn for a long time, but he
hated them for their ugliness and their size.  The ugliest boots in
the whole world, I should think,  he said.
 They re boots, anyway,  said a Voice.
 Yes,  Mr Marvel agreed.  They were given to me. Too large.
I m tired of them. That s why I ve been begging for boots, boots,
boots everywhere, but no one has any to give away. 
 H m,  said the Voice.
 No. I ve been begging for boots round here for ten years. I ve
got all my boots around here, and now look at them — they re the
best they can find for me. 
He turned his head over his shoulder to look at the boots of
the speaker — but they weren t there. There were neither boots
nor legs — nothing.
 Where are you?  he asked. He saw the road, the open country,
but no sign of any man except himself.  Am I mad? I must be
seeing things. 
 No, you aren t,  said the Voice.  Don t be frightened. 
   Frightened, frightened!  said Mr Marvel.  Come here. Where
 I m finished,  said Mr Thomas Marvel, sitting up and taking
his wounded toe in his hand.  I don t understand it. Stones
throwing themselves. Stones talking. I m finished. 
 It s very simple,  said the Voice.  I m an invisible man. 
Tell me something I don t know,  said Mr Marvel, white with the pain.  Where you re hidden — how you do it — I don t know. 
 I m invisible,  said the Voice.  That s what I want you to
understand. 
 Anyone can see that. There s no need for you to be so angry.
Now then. Give us an idea. Where are you hidden? 
 I m invisible. That s the point. And what I want you to
understand is this— 
 But where are you?  interrupted Mr Marvel.
 Here — six yards in front of you. 
 Oh, no! I m not blind. You ll be telling me next you re just
thin air. 
 Yes. I am — thin air. You re looking through me. 
 What! Isn t there anything in you? 
 I am just a human being — solid, needing food and drink,
needing clothes, too... But I m invisible. You see? Invisible. Simple
idea. Invisible. 
 What, are you real? 
 Yes, real. 
 Let me feel your hand,  said Marvel,  if you are real. 
He felt with his fingers the hand that had closed round his
wrist and his touch went up the arm, found a chest, and touched
a bearded face.
Mr Marvel s own face showed shock and surprise.
 Of course, all this isn t half so strange as you think,  said the
Invisible Man.
 It s quite strange enough for me,  said Mr Marvel.  How do
you manage it? How is it done? 
 It s a very long story. And besides— 
 I tell you, the whole business is — I can t understand,  said Mr
Marvel.
 What I want to say now is this: I need help. I need help
immediately. I came on you suddenly. I was wandering around
helpless, without clothes. And I saw you— 
     
are you? 
 Don t be frightened,  said the Voice.
 You ll be frightened soon. Let me get hold of you. Are you
buried? 
There was no answer. Mr Marvel began to put on his coat.
 I could have sworn I heard a voice. 
 So you did. 
 It s there again,  said Mr Marvel, closing his eyes and running
his hand across his forehead.  I must have gone mad. 
 Don t be a fool,  said the Voice.  You think I m just in your
imagination —just in your mind? 
 What else can you be?  said Mr Marvel, rubbing the back of
his neck.
 Very well,  said the Voice,  I m going to throw stones at you
until you think differently. 
 But where are you? 
The Voice made no answer. A stone came whistling through
the empty air and just missed Mr Marvel s shoulder. He turned
round and saw a stone jump up into the air, hang there for a
moment, and fall at his feet. Another came and hit his bare toes,
which made Mr Marvel cry aloud. Then he started to run, fell
over something unseen, and came to rest sitting by the road.
 Now,  said the Voice, am I just in your mind? 
Mr Marvel struggled to his feet, and was immediately rolled
over again. He lay quiet for a moment.
 If you struggle any more,  said the Voice, I ll throw this stone
at your head.  Oh, Lord!  said Mr Marvel.
 I came up behind you, stopped, went on, then stopped again.
"Here," I said to myself, "is the man for me." So I turned and
came back to you. You. And— 
 Oh, Lord? said Mr Marvel.  May I ask: What does it feel like?
And what kind of help do you need? Invisible! 
 I want you to help me get clothes and shelter, and then other
things. I ve left those things long enough. If you won t — well! . ..
But you will — you must 
 Look here,  said Mr Marvel.  Don t knock me about any more.
And let me go. I must get my breath back. And you ve very
nearly broken my toe. It s all so unreasonable. Empty earth, empty
sky. Nothing visible for miles except Nature. And then comes a
voice. A voice out of heaven! And stones. And a hand. Lord! 
 Pull yourself together,  said the Voice,  for you have to do the
work I want you to do. 
Mr Marvel s mouth opened wide, and his eyes were round.
 I ve chosen you,  said the Voice.  You are the only man except
some of those fools down there who knows there is such a thing
as an Invisible Man. You have to be my helper. Help me - and I
will do great things for you. An Invisible Man is a man of great
power.  He stopped for a moment to sneeze loudly.
 But if you trick me,  he said, if you fail to do as I tell you- 
He paused and took hold of Mr Marvel s shoulder. Mr Marvel
gave a cry of terror at the touch.
 I don t want to trick you,  he said, moving away from the
fingers.  Don t think that, whatever you do. All I want to do is
help you - j u s t tell me what I have got to do. Whatever you want
done, I shall be pleased to do it. 
At about four o clock, a stranger entered the village from the
direction of the hills. He was a short, fat person in a dirty old hat,
and he seemed to be very much out of breath. There was fear in
his face, and he seemed to be talking to himself. Some of the
  
village men noticed him. Mr Huxter saw him go up the steps of
the inn, and turn towards the parlour. Mr Huxter heard voices
from the parlour telling the man that he must not go in.
 That room s private!  said Mr Hall, and the stranger shut the
door and went into the bar.
A few minutes later he came out again, rubbing his mouth as
if he had been having a drink. He stood looking around him for
a few moments, and then walked towards the gates of the yard,
where the parlour window was. He leant against one of the
gateposts and took out a short pipe. Although he seemed calm,
his hands were trembling.
Suddenly he put the pipe back in his pocket and disappeared
into the yard. Immediately Mr Huxter, guessing that the man was
a thief, ran out of his shop to stop him. As he did so, Mr Marvel
reappeared, carrying some clothes tied together in one hand and
three books in the other. As soon as he saw Huxter he turned and
began to run towards the hill road.
 Stop thief!  cried Huxter, and set off after him.
Mr Huxter had hardly gone any distance at all when
something seized his leg and sent him flying through the air. He
saw the ground suddenly move towards his face, and then -
nothing.
Chapter  
In the Coach and Horses
At the time when Mr Marvel went into the inn, Mr Cuss and Mr
Bunting were in the parlour, searching the stranger s property in
the hope of finding something to explain the events of the
morning. Jaffers had recovered from his fall and had gone home.
Mrs Hall had tidied the stranger s clothes and put them away. And
under the window where the stranger did his work, Mr Cuss
found three big books.
   Now,  said Cuss,  we shall learn something. 
But when they opened the books they could read nothing.
Cuss turned the pages.
 Dear me,  he said, I can t understand. 
 No pictures, nothing to show—?  asked Mr Bunting.
 See for yourself,  said Mr Cuss,  it s all Greek or Russian or
some other language. 
The door opened suddenly. Both men looked round. It was Mr
Marvel. He held the door open for a moment.
 I beg your pardon,  he said.
 Please shut that door,  said Mr Cuss, and Mr Marvel went out.
 My nerves - my nerves are in pieces today,  said Mr Cuss.  It
made me jump when the door opened like that. 
Mr Bunting smiled.  Now let us look at the books again. It s
true that strange things have been happening in the village. But of
course I can t believe in an invisible man. I can t 
 No. Though I tell you I saw right down his sleeve. 
 But are you sure?  said Mr Bunting.  Are you quite sure? 
 Quite. I ve said so. There s no doubt at all. Now let s look at
these books. 
Then the hands let their necks go and the two men sat up, now
very red in the face.
 Don t move,  said the Voice.  Here s the poker, you see. 
They saw the poker dance in the air. It touched Mr Bunting s
nose.
 Now, where are my clothes? Just now, though the days are
quite warm enough for an invisible man to run about without
anything on, the evenings are cold. I want some clothes. And I
must also have those three books. 
Chapter   
T h e Invisible M a n Loses H i s T e m p e r
 I am sorry to be rough,  said the Voice.  Since when did you
learn to look through other men s possessions? 
Two noses struck the table.  To come unasked into a stranger s
private room! Listen. I am a strong man. I could kill you both and
escape unseen, if I wanted to. If I let you go, you must promise to
do as I tell you. 
 Yes,  said Mr Bunting. While these things were going on in the parlour, and while Mr
Huxter was watching Mr Marvel as he leaned smoking his pipe
against the gate, Mr Hall and Teddy Henfrey stood talking nearby.
Suddenly there came a loud knock on the door of the parlour,
a cry, and then — silence.
 Hel-lo!  said Teddy Henfrey.
 Hel-lo!  from the bar.
Mr Hall and Teddy looked at the door.
 Something s wrong,  said Hall.
For a long time they listened. Strange noises were coming
from behind the closed door, as if something was falling about.
Then a sharp cry.
 No! No, you don t.  Then silence.
 What s that?  exclaimed Henfrey in a low voice.
 Is everything all right there?  called Hall.
 Quite ri-ight,  came Mr Bunting s voice,  qui-ite! Don t come
in! 
They stood listening.
 I can t , they heard Mr Bunting say.  I tell you, sir, I will not. 
 Who s that speaking now?  asked Henfrey.
     
They turned over the pages, unable to read a word of their
strange language. Suddenly Mr Bunting felt something take hold
of the back of his neck. He was unable to lift his head.
 Don t move, little men, or I ll knock your brains out. 
Mr Bunting looked at Cuss, whose face had turned white with
fear. Mr Cuss, I suppose,  said Hall.  Can you hear anything? 
Silence.
 Someone is throwing the table around,  said Hall.
Mrs Hall appeared behind the bar. When they told her, she
would not believe anything strange was happening. Perhaps they
were moving the chairs and table.
 Didn t I hear the window?  said Henfrey.
 What window?  asked Mrs Hall.
 The parlour window,  said Henfrey.
Everyone stood listening. Mrs Hall, looking straight in front of
her, saw, without seeing, the bright shape of the inn door, the
white road, and Huxter s shop-front shining in the June sun.
Suddenly Huxter s door opened, and Huxter appeared, his eyes
staring with excitement, his arms waving in the air.
 Stop thief]  cried Huxter, and he ran towards the yard gates
and disappeared.
At the same time a noise came from the parlour, and there was
the sound of windows being closed.
Hall, Henfrey, and everyone in the bar rushed out into the
street. They saw someone run round the corner towards the hill
road, and Mr Huxter jump into the air and fall on his face and
shoulder. Hall and two workmen ran down the street and saw Mr
Marvel disappearing past the church wall.
But Hall had hardly run    yards when he gave a loud shout
and fell on his side, pulling one of the workmen with him. The
second workman came up, and he too was knocked down. Then
came the rush of the village crowd. The first man was surprised
to see Huxter and Hall on the ground. Suddenly something
happened to his feet, and he was lying on his back, the crowd was
falling over him, and he was being sworn at by a number of
angry people.
When Hall, Henfrey and the workmen ran out of the house,
Mrs Hall had remained in the bar. Suddenly the parlour door was
  
opened, Mr Cuss appeared and, without looking at her, rushed
down the steps towards the corner of the street.
 Hold him!  he cried.  Don t let him drop those books and
clothes! You can see him so long as he holds them. 
He knew nothing of Marvel; for the Invisible Man had
handed over the books and clothes to him in the yard. The face
of Mr Cuss was angry and determined, but there was something
wrong with his clothes: he was wearing a tablecloth.
 Hold him!  he shouted.  He s got my trousers — and all the
vicar s clothes! 
Coming round the corner to join the crowd, he was knocked
off his feet and lay kicking on the ground. Somebody stepped on
his finger. He struggled to his feet, something knocked against
him and threw him on his knees again, and he saw that everyone
was running back to the village. He rose again, and was hit
behind the ear. He set off straight back to the village inn as fast as
he could run, and on his way jumped over the body of Huxter,
who was now sitting up.
Behind him, as he was halfway up the inn steps, he heard a
sudden cry of anger above the noise, and the sound of someone
being struck in the face. He knew the voice as that of the
Invisible Man.
In another moment Mr Cuss was back in the parlour.
 He s coming back, Bunting!  he said, rushing in.  Save
yourself! 
Mr Bunting was standing in the window, trying to dress
himself in the curtains and a newspaper.
 Who s coming?  he said, so surprised that his dress nearly fell
off him.
 The Invisible Man!  said Cuss, and rushed to the window.
 We d better move — quick. He s fighting like a madman! 
In another moment he was out in the yard.
Mr Bunting heard a frightful struggle in the passage of the
  inn, and decided to leave. He climbed out of the window, and ran
up the village street as fast as his fat little legs could carry him.
Chapter   
Mr Marvel Tries to Say No
Mr Marvel was walking painfully through the thick woods on
the road to Bramblehurst. He looked very unhappy and was
carrying three books and some clothes wrapped in a blue
tablecloth. A Voice went with him and he was held tightly by
unseen hands.
 If you try to escape again,  said the Voice, I will kill you. 
 I didn t try to escape,  said Mr Marvel.
The Voice swore a few times and then stopped. Mr Marvel,
who was not used to so much work, was very tired. There was
silence for a time. Then, I shall have to make use of you. You are a
poor creature, but I must. 
 Yes, I am,  said Marvel.
 You are,  said the Voice.
 I m not strong,  said Marvel. Then after a short silence he
repeated,  I m not strong. I ve got a weak heart. I can t do what
you want. 
 I ll make you,  said the Voice.
 I wish I was dead,  said Marvel.
 Go on! Walk! Move!  said the Voice.
 It s cruel,  said Marvel.
 Be quiet,  said the Voice.  I ll see that you re all right. But be
quiet. I want to think. 
Soon they saw the lights of a village.
 I shall keep my hand on your shoulder,  said the Voice.  Go
straight through the village, and don t try to say anything to
anybody. 
  
Chapter   
At Port S t o w e
At ten o clock the next morning Mr Marvel, dirty, tired, and
worried, sat outside a little inn at Port Stowe. Beside him were
the books, but now they were tied up with string. He had left the
clothes in the woods beyond Bramblehurst. Mr Marvel sat on a
wooden seat and, although no one took any notice of him, he
seemed excited.
When he had been sitting for nearly an hour an old sailor,
with a newspaper in his hand, came out of the inn and sat down
beside him.
 Pleasant day,  said the sailor.
Mr Marvel looked around him with eyes that were full of
terror.  Very,  he replied.
The sailor looked around him as if he had nothing to do, and
then at Mr Marvel s dusty clothes and the books beside him. He
had heard the sound of money being dropped into a pocket, and
thought that Mr Marvel did not look like a man who would
carry much money.
 Books?  he said suddenly.
Mr Marvel jumped and looked at them.  Oh, yes,  he said.  Yes,
they re books. 
 There are some strange things in books,  said the sailor.
 There are,  said Mr Marvel.
 And some strange things out of them,  said the sailor.
 True,  said Mr Marvel.
 There are some strange things in newspapers, for example, 
said the sailor.
 There are. 
 In this newspaper,  said the sailor.
 Ah!  said Mr Marvel.
 There s a story,  said the sailor,  there s a story about an
Invisible Man.  And he told Mr Marvel as much of the story as
  the newspaper contained.  I don t like it,  he said.  He might be
anywhere, might be here at this moment listening to us. And just
think, if he wanted to steal or kill, what is there to stop him? 
Mr Marvel seemed to be listening for the least sound.
 Ah - and - well—  he said. And lowering his voice,  I know
something about this Invisible Man. 
 Oh,  said the sailor, you? 
 Yes,  said Mr Marvel,  me. 
The sailor did not seem to believe Mr Marvel.
 It happened like this,  Mr Marvel began, and then his
expression changed suddenly.
 Ow!  he said. He rose stiffly from his seat, as if in pain.
 What s the matter?  said the sailor.
 I — I think I must be going,  said Mr Marvel.
 But you were just going to tell me about this Invisible Man, 
said the sailor.
Mr Marvel seemed to think carefully.
 A lie,  said a Voice.
 It s a lie,  said Mr Marvel.
 But it s in the paper,  said the sailor.
 Yes,  said Mr Marvel loudly, but it s a lie. I know the man who
started it. There isn t any Invisible Man at all. 
 But this paper? D you mean to say—? 
 Not a word of truth in it,  said Mr Marvel firmly.
The sailor stared, the paper in his hand. Mr Marvel turned
round.
 Wait a bit,  said the sailor, rising and speaking slowly.  D you
mean to say—? 
 I do,  said Mr Marvel.
 Then why did you let me go on and tell you all this, then?
What do you mean by letting a man make a fool of himself like
that for, eh? 
 Come along,  said a Voice, and Mr Marvel was suddenly
  
turned round and he started marching off in a strange, jumpy
manner.
 Silly devil,  said the sailor, legs wide apart, watching the little
man go.  I ll show you, you silly fool! It s here in the paper! 
And there was another strange thing he was soon to hear
about, that had happened quite close to him. And that was a
 hand full of money  travelling by itself along by the wall. A sailor
friend had seen this strange sight that very morning. He had tried
to take the money and had been knocked down by an unseen
hand, and when he had got to his feet the money had
disappeared.
The story of the flying money was true. And all round that
neighbourhood, even from the bank, from shops and inns, money
had quietly walked away. And it had found its way into Mi-
Marvel s pocket, so the sailor had heard.
Chapter   
The Man in a Hurry
In the early evening time, Dr Kemp was sitting in his study on
the hill above Burdock. It was a pleasant little upstairs room, with
three windows — north, west, and south — with bookshelves
crowded with books and with a broad writing table. Dr Kemp
was a tall, thin man of about thirty-five, with fair hair. He was
writing.
His eye, soon wandering from his work, caught the sunset
behind the hill opposite his house. For a minute, perhaps, he sat,
pen in mouth, admiring the rich golden colour, and then he saw
the little figure of a man running over the hill towards him. He
was a shortish little man, in a dirty old hat, and he was running
fast.
Dr Kemp got up, went to the window, and stared at the
hillside and the dark little figure running down it.  He seems to
  At the bottom of the hill was an inn called the Happy Cricketers.
Inside, the barman leant his fat red arms on the table and talked
about horses with a cabman, while a black-bearded man who
spoke like an American talked to a policeman.
 What s the shouting about?  said the cabman, trying to see up
the hill over the dirty yellow curtains in the low window of the
inn. Somebody ran past outside.
 Fire, perhaps,  said the barman. The door was pushed open, and Marvel, crying, his hat gone,
the neck of his coat torn open, rushed in and tried to shut the
door. It was held half open by a door-stop.
 Coming!  he cried, his voice cracked with terror.  He s
coming. The Invisible Man! After me. Help! Help! Help! 
 Shut the doors,  said the policeman.  Who s coming? What s
the matter?  He went to the door and removed the door-stop,
and the door shut with a bang. The man with the beard closed
the other door.
 Let me hide,  said Marvel, with tears running down his face.
 Let me hide. Lock me in somewhere. I tell you he s after me. I
escaped. He said he d kill me, and he will. 
 You re safe,  said the man with the black beard.  The door s
shut. What s it all about? 
 Let me hide,  said Marvel, and cried aloud as a blow suddenly
made the locked door shake. The blow was followed by a hurried
knocking and a shouting outside.
 Hello,  cried the policeman,  who s there? 
 He ll kill me,  shouted Mr Marvel,  he s got a knife or
something. Don t open the door. Please don t open the door.
Where shall I hide? 
 Is this the Invisible Man, then?  asked the black-bearded man,
with one hand behind him.  I think it s about time we saw him. 
The window of the inn was suddenly broken in, and there
were shouts, and people running about in the street. The
policeman had been standing on a chair, looking out of the
window to see who was at the door. He got down.  That s who it
is,  he said. The barman stood in front of the parlour door, where
Mr Marvel was now locked in, and stared at the broken window.
Then he came round to the two other men.
Everything was suddenly quiet.  I wish I had my stick,  said
the policeman.  If we open the door, he ll come in. Nothing can
stop him. 
     
be in a hurry,  said Dr Kemp to himself.
Then the running man was hidden behind some houses; he
came into sight and disappeared again — still running.
But those who were nearer to him saw the terror in his face.
He looked neither to the right nor left, but his wide eyes stared
straight down the hill to where the lamps were being lit and
there were people crowding together in the street. Everybody he
passed stopped and began staring up and down the road, and
asking one another, half afraid, why the man was running so
hard.
And then, far up the hill, a dog playing in the road growled
and ran under a gate, and something — a wind — a noise of feet, a
sound like heavy breathing — rushed by.
People cried out. People jumped off the footpath. They
shouted as the thing rushed past them down the hill, and they
were still shouting in the street before Marvel was halfway there.
They were running into houses with the news and shutting the
doors behind them. He heard it, and ran even faster. Fear came
hurrying by, rushed ahead of him, and in a moment had seized
the town.
 The Invisible Man is coming! The Invisible Man?
Chapter   
In the H a p p y Cricketers Don t be in too much of a hurry about that door,  said the
cabman anxiously.
 Unlock it,  said the man with the black beard,  and if he
comes ...  He showed them the revolver in his hand.
 That won t do,  said the policeman;  that s murder. 
 I know what country I m in,  said the man with the beard.
 I m going to shoot at his legs. Unlock it. 
 Not with that thing going off behind me,  said the barman.
 Very well,  said the man with the black beard. He stepped
forward with his gun ready, and unlocked the door himself.
Barman, cabman and policeman turned around.
 Come in,  said the bearded man in a low voice, standing back
and facing the door with his gun behind him. No one came in,
and the door remained closed.
 Are all the doors of the house shut?  asked Marvel, five
minutes later.  He s going round to the back. 
 There s the yard door,  said the barman,  and the private door.
The yard door— 
He rushed out of the bar.
In a minute he appeared again with a long sharp knife in his
hand.  The yard door was open,  he said.
 He may be in the house now,  said the cabman.
The man with the beard put the gun back in his pocket. As he
did so, the door opened, something rushed past them, and the
parlour door burst open. They heard Marvel cry out and ran to
his rescue. The bearded man s revolver went off, and the mirror at
the back of the parlour came crashing down on the floor.
As the barman came into the room, he saw Marvel struggling
against the door that led to the yard and kitchen. The door flew
open and Marvel was dragged into the kitchen.
The policeman, who had been trying to pass the barman,
rushed in, followed by the cabman, caught hold of the invisible
hand that held Marvel, was hit in the face and fell down. Then the cabman took hold of something.
 I ve got him,  said the cabman.
 Here he is!  said the barman.
Mr Marvel suddenly dropped to the ground, and made an
attempt to hide behind the legs of the fighting men. The struggle
went backwards and forwards near the door. The voice of the
Invisible Man was heard for the first time, as the policeman
stepped on his foot. Then he cried out, and his arms flew out.
The cabman was suddenly knocked to the ground by a kick in
the stomach. The door into the bar parlour from the kitchen shut
with a bang as Mr Marvel escaped through it. The men in the
kitchen found themselves struggling with empty air.
     
 Where s he gone?  cried the man with the beard.  Out? 
 This way,  said the policeman, stepping into the yard and
stopping.
A large stone flew by his head and fell on the kitchen table.
 I ll show him,  shouted the man with the black beard and he
fired five rapid shots in the direction the stone had come from. As
he fired, the man with the beard moved his hand slightly, so that
his shots went from one side to the other of the narrow yard.
A silence followed.  Come along,  he said,  and feel around for
his body. 
Chapter    
Dr Kemp s Visitor
Dr Kemp was writing in his study when he heard the shots.
Crack, crack, crack, they came, one after the other.
 Hello!  said Dr Kemp to himself, putting his pen into his
mouth again and listening.  Who s letting off guns in Burdock?
What are they doing now? 
He went to the south window, threw it up and, leaning out,
stared down on the town.  It looks like a crowd down by theHappy Cricketers,  he said to himself. Then his eyes wandered
over the town to far away where the ships  lights shone. The moon
in its first quarter hung over the hill to the west, and the stars were
clear and bright.
Five minutes later, Dr Kemp pulled down the window again,
and returned to his writing desk.
It must have been about an hour after this that the front-door
bell rang. He sat listening. He heard the servant go to the door,
and waited for the sound of her feet on the staircase, but she did
not come.
 What was that about?  Dr Kemp asked himself.
He tried to go on with his work, failed, and went downstairs.
He rang the bell and called to the servant as she appeared in the
hall.
 Was that a letter?  he asked.
 Only the bell ringing, sir, and no one there,  she answered.
 I m restless tonight,  he said to himself. He went back to his
study.
Soon afterwards he was hard at work again, and his room was
silent except for the sounds of the clock and his pen moving over
the paper.
It was two o clock before he had finished his work for the
night. He rose and went upstairs to bed. When he had taken off
his coat and shirt, he felt thirsty. He took a lamp and went down
to the dining room in search of a drink.
Dr Kemp s scientific work had trained him to notice things
quickly. As he crossed the hall, he saw a dark spot on the floor near
the stairs. He went on upstairs, and then he asked himself what the
dark spot on the floor might be. He went back to the hall, and,
bending down, touched the spot. It looked and felt like drying
blood.
him stop. There was blood on the handle of his door.
He looked at his own hand. It was quite clean. Then he
remembered that the door of his room had been open when he
came down from his study, and that he had not touched the
handle at all. He went straight into his bedroom, his face quite
calm — perhaps a little more determined than usual .. . He looked
at the bed. There was a pool of blood, and the sheet was torn. He
had not noticed this when he had been in the room before. The
other side of the bed looked as if someone had been lying on it.
Then he seemed to hear a low voice say,  Help me! — Kemp! 
But Dr Kemp did not believe in  voices .
He stood staring at the sheets. Was it really a voice? He looked
around him again, and noticed nothing. But he clearly heard
something move across the room. A strange feeling came over
him. He closed the door of the room and came forward.
Suddenly, with a shock, he saw a bloody bandage hanging in the
air between him and the bed.
He stared at it in surprise. It was an empty bandage — a bandage
properly tied, but quite empty. He would have moved forward to
take hold of it, but a touch stopped him and a voice spoke quite
close to him.
 Kemp!  said the Voice.
 Eh!  said Kemp, with his mouth open.
Said the Voice, I m an invisible man. 
Kemp made no answer for a moment or two, but simply stared
at the bandage.  The Invisible Man?  he said at last.
 I m an invisible man,  repeated the Voice.
 I thought it was a lie,  he said.  Have you got a bandage on?  he
He returned upstairs, looking around him and thinking about
the blood spot. Then suddenly he saw something which made asked.
 Yes,  said the Invisible Man.
 Oh!  said Kemp, and then, I say! But this is nonsense. It s some
trick.  He stepped forward suddenly, stretched out his hand
towards the bandage and met invisible fingers.
      Keep steady, Kemp, in God s name! I want help badly. Stop! 
The hand seized his arm. He struck at it.  Kemp!  cried the
Voice.  Kemp, keep still! 
A desire to free himself took hold of Kemp. But the hand held
his shoulder, and he was suddenly pushed and fell backwards upon
the bed. He opened his mouth to shout, and the corner of the
sheet was pushed between his teeth. The Invisible Man held him
down, but his arms were free, and he hit back fiercely.
 Listen to reason, will you?  said the Invisible Man.  By heaven,
you ll make me mad! Stop struggling and lie still! Lie still! 
Kemp struggled for another moment, and then lay still.
 Let me get up,  he said.  I ll stay where I am. And let me sit
quiet for a minute. 
He sat up and felt his neck.
 I m just an ordinary man — a man you used to know — made
invisible. Do you remember Griffin? 
 Griffin?  repeated Kemp.
 Griffin,  answered the Voice.  A younger student than you. 
 What has this to do with Griffin? 
 I am Griffin. 
Kemp laughed.  It s too much of a shock,  he said.  But what
devil s work can make a man invisible? 
 It s no devil s work. It s honest and simple enough. 
 It s terrible!  said Kemp.  How on earth—? 
 I m wounded and in pain, and tired . . . Great God! Kemp, you
are a man. Keep calm. Give me some food and drink, and let me
sit down here. 
Kemp stared at the bandage as it moved across the room, then
saw a chair slide along the floor and come to rest near the bed. It
made a noise, and the seat sank slightly. He rubbed his eyes and
felt his neck again.
 This beats magic,  he said, and laughed stupidly.
 That s better. Thank heaven, you re becoming sensible! 
  
 Or silly,  said Kemp, and rubbed his eyes again.
 Give me something to drink. I m nearly dead. 
 It didn t feel like that. Where are you? If I get up, shall I run
into you? There! All right. A drink . . . Here. Where shall I give it
you? 
Kemp felt the glass taken out of his hand. He let it go into the
air. It came to rest just in front of the chair seat. He stared at it.
 This . . . I don t believe it . . . I must be mad. 
 Nonsense!  said the Voice.  Listen to me. I m hungry, and the
night is cold to a man with no clothes on. 
 Food?  offered Kemp.
The glass emptied itself.
 Yes,  said the Invisible Man, putting it down.  Can you give me
something to wear? 
Kemp found some clothes.  These?  he asked.
They were taken from him. They hung in the air, buttoned
themselves and sat down in the chair.
 The maddest thing I ve ever seen in my life,  said Kemp.
 Some food? 
Kemp went to the kitchen for some bread and some meat,
returned and put them on a table in front of his guest.
 Never mind about a knife,  said the Invisible Man: and a piece
of meat hung in the air and disappeared with a sound of eating.
 I always like to have clothes on when I eat,  said the Voice.
 Is your arm all right? 
 Not very painful. 
 It s all mad, as mad as can be. 
 Quite reasonable,  said the Invisible Man.
 But how s it done?  began Kemp.  What were the shots?  he
asked.  How did the shooting begin? 
 There was a man - I tried to make him help me! - who tried
to steal my money. And he has stolen it. 
 Is he invisible too? 
   No. 
 Well? 
 Can t I have some more to eat before I tell you all about it?
I m hungry — in pain. And you want me to tell stories! 
Kemp got up.  You didn t do any shooting?  he asked.
 Not me,  said his visitor.  Some fool fired, a man I d never seen
before. A lot of them got frightened. They all got frightened of
me. I say — I want more to eat than this, Kemp. 
 I ll see whether there s anything more to eat downstairs,  said
Kemp.  Not much, I m afraid. 
Kemp found some more food. And when his guest had eaten,
he told him to try to get some sleep.
Though the Invisible Man was wounded and tired, he refused
to accept Kemp s word that no one would try to seize him. He
examined the two windows of the bedroom, pulled up the blinds
and opened the windows to see whether it was possible to get out
that way, as Kemp had told him. Outside the night was very quiet
and still, and the new moon was setting over the hill. Then he
examined the key of the bedroom door. At last he was satisfied.
He stood by the fireside and Kemp heard his breathing relax.
 I m sorry,  said the Invisible Man,  if I cannot tell you all that
I ve done tonight, but I m so tired. It s foolish, no doubt. It s
horrible! But, believe me, Kemp, in spite of your arguments, it s
quite a possible thing. I ve made a discovery. I intended to keep it
secret. I can t. I must have someone to help me. And you . . . We
can do such great things together... But tomorrow. Now, Kemp, I
feel as though I must sleep or die. 
They said goodnight to each other, and Kemp stayed in his
room, thinking. He picked up a newspaper and found that it was
full of reports of the Invisible Man. As he read, he began to feel
afraid of what his guest might do if he was allowed to stay free. He
wrote a note and addressed it to "Colonel Adye, Port Burdock".
  
Chapter   
How to Become Invisible
The next morning Kemp heard a loud noise and went to see his
guest.
 What s the matter?  asked Kemp, when the Invisible Man let
him in.
 Nothing,  was the answer.
 But, good heavens! What was that crash? 
 I lost my temper,  said the Invisible Man.  I forgot this arm;
and it s sore. 
 You re rather in the habit of losing your temper. 
 I am. 
 Your story is in the papers,  Kemp said.
The Invisible Man swore.
 Come and have some breakfast,  said Kemp, leading the way.
 Before we can do anything else,  he went on,  I must understand
a little more about you.  He had sat down, with the air of a man
who means to talk seriously.
 It s simple enough,  said Griffin.
 No doubt it s simple enough to you, but—  Kemp laughed.
 Well, yes, to me it seemed strange at first, no doubt. But we
can still do great things! I found the secret first at Chesilstowe
College. 
 Chesilstowe? 
 I went there after I left London. You know I have always been
interested in light. 
 Ah! 
 I said: "I will give my life to this. This is worth my trouble."
You know what fools we are at twenty-two. 
 Fools then and fools now,  said Kemp.
 As though just knowing could satisfy a man! I saw a way to
change the human body, or any other kind of body . . . And then
the strange man, or rather the clothes of a man, sitting opposite
  Kemp, explained how a student of science had disappeared.
 If you take a small piece of glass and crush it into powder, the
powder is white and solid like salt. You can t see through it.
Human flesh, white paper, cloth, hair, are really made of a kind of
powder. The tiny grains of powder break up the light which
shines on them, so that it can t shine through them, and that is
why we can see flesh and paper. Now, if you could smooth the
broken grains of powder so that they would not break up the
light, they would no longer look solid. The light would shine
through them, just as now the sun is shining through me. You
can try it with a piece of white paper and a drop of oil. Pour a
little oil on the paper and things will begin to show through it. If
the oil is good enough and the paper is bad enough, you will be
able to see through the paper to the print on the other side. That
is because the oil is smooth and it smoothes out the rough
surfaces of each little grain of the powder.
Chapter   
The Experiment
 Well, I found something which would do to human flesh
what the oil does to the paper, and would do it so perfectly that
there is no tiny part of my body which holds up the light. It is as
if you had taken powdered glass and turned it back into the
unbroken glass of that window. 
The explanation, as always between two scientists, led to all
kinds of questions. Kemp was so surprised at the story that he
nearly forgot that his friend was invisible.
 Yes,  said the Voice, I had found it all. The way was open - and
then — then after years of care and working in secret — then I
knew that I could do nothing. I knew, and I was helpless. And
that was after three years of secrecy and hard work. 
 Why could you do nothing?  asked Kemp.
 I had no money,  said the Invisible Man, and went to stare out
of the window.
He turned round.  I robbed the old man — robbed my father.
The money was not his, and he shot himself For a moment Kemp sat in silence, staring at the back of the
headless figure at the window. Then he rose, took the Invisible
Man s arm and turned him away from the view.
 You re tired,  he said,  and while I m sitting down, you walk
around. Have my chair. 
He got up and stood between Griffin and the nearest window.
For a time Griffin sat silently, and then he went on with his
story.
 I d already left the College,  he said,  when that happened. It
was last December. I had taken a room in London, in a big house
in Great Portland Street.
 It was all like a dream, that short visit to my father in my old
home. When I returned to my room it seemed like waking from
a dream to reality. Here were the things I knew and loved. Here
was the equipment; the experiments were arranged and waiting.
And now there was hardly any difficulty left, beyond the
planning of details.
 I will tell you, Kemp, sooner or later, all the complicated
details. We need not talk about that now. For the most part,
except for certain words I chose to remember, they are written in
those books that that tramp has hidden, in a way that only I can
understand. We must hunt him down.
 First I tried some white wool. It was the strangest thing in the
world to see it lose its substance, like smoke, and disappear. I
could hardly believe I had done it. I put my hand into the
emptiness and there was the thing as solid as ever. I felt it, and
threw it on the floor. I had a little trouble finding it again.
 And then I heard a noise behind me and, turning, saw a white
cat, very dirty, outside the window. A thought came into my
head. "Everything is ready for you," I said, and went to the
window, opened it, and called softly. She came in. The poor
     creature was thirsty and I gave her some milk. After that she went
smelling round the room, plainly with the idea of making herself
at home. The invisible wool upset her a bit; you should have seen
her attack it! But I made her comfortable on my bed. 
 And then you made the cat invisible? 
 Yes: it took four hours. 
 You don t mean to say there s an Invisible Cat in the world? 
said Kemp.
 If it hasn t been killed,  said the Invisible Man.  Why not? 
 Why not?  repeated Kemp.  Go on. 
He was silent for a few minutes and then continued.  My only
clear thought,  he said,  was that the thing had to be completed.
And it had to be done soon, for I had little money left. After a
time I ate some food and went to sleep in my clothes on my bed.
 I was woken by a loud knock at the door. It was the owner of
my room. He said I had been hurting a cat in the night, he was
sure. He wanted to know all about it. I told him there had been
no cat in my room. Then the noise of my experiments could be
heard all over the house, he said. That was true, certainly. He
came into the room, asked me what I was doing, and said it had
always been a respectable house. In the end I got angry, pushed
him out and shut the door. He made some noise outside, but I
didn t listen. After a time he "went away.
 But I didn t know what he planned to do, nor even what he
had the power to do. To move to new rooms would have meant
delay - I had twenty pounds left in the world, most of it in a
bank. If he brought the police, my room might be searched. What
could I do? Disappear! Of course. It was all done that evening
and night.
 There was some pain at first. I felt sick. At times I cried out. I
talked aloud to myself. But I did not give up. I shall never forget
seeing my hands. They became white as white paper and then,
slowly, became like glass. And then - they had disappeared. At first
  
I was weak as a little child, walking on legs I could not see.
 I slept during the morning, pulling a sheet over my eyes to
shut out the light, and I was woken again by a knocking. My
strength had returned. I sat up and listened and heard talking.
Soon the knocking was repeated and voices called. To gain time I
answered them. My window opened on to a roof. I stepped
through it, closed it, stood outside and watched. The old man and
his two sons came into the room.
 You may imagine their surprise at finding the room empty.
One of the younger men rushed to the window at once, threw it
open and stared out. His eyes and his thick-lipped, bearded face
came close to my own. He looked right through me. So did the
others. The old man went and looked under the bed.
 While they were all talking together, I came back into the
room, slipped past them, and went down the stairs. In one room I
found a box of matches, and when they had come down I
returned to my own room and set fire to the papers, the
bedcovers and the furniture. 
 You set the house on fire? 
 Set the house on fire! Yes. It was the only way to hide my
tracks. 
For the next hour he went on with his story, and Kemp
listened. It was the story of how the Invisible Man had got some
clothes, how he lived by getting food and drink wherever he
could, of the shelter he found and the beds he slept in, until he
came to Iping.
Chapter   
T h e P l a n T h a t Failed
 But now,  said Kemp, looking out of the window, what are we to
do? 
He moved nearer to his guest so that he did not see the three
  men who were coming up the hill road — too slowly, as it seemed
to Kemp.
 What were you planning to do, when you were going to Port
Burdock? Did you have a plan? 
 I was going to leave the country. But I have rather changed
that plan since seeing you. I thought it would be wise, now the
weather is hot, to make for the south. Especially as my secret was
known, and everyone would be watching for a man all wrapped
up like me. You have regular boats from here to France. My idea
was to get on board one. Then I could go by train into Spain, or
else to Algiers. It wouldn t be difficult. There a man could be
invisible all the time, but still live and do things. I was using that
tramp as a moneybox and carrier until I decided how to get my
books and things sent over to join me. 
 That s clear. 
 And then he tried to rob me! He has hidden my books,
Kemp. Hidden my books! If I can get hold of him, I ll- 
 You d better get the books from him first. 
 But where is he? Do you know? 
 He s in the town police station, locked up, at his own request,
in the strongest room in the place. 
 The rat!  said the Invisible Man.
 But that delays your plans a little. 
 We must get those books; those books are necessary. 
 Certainly,  said Kemp, a little anxiously, unsure if he heard
footsteps outside.  Certainly we must get those books. But that
won t be difficult, if he doesn t know they re for you. 
 No,  said the Invisible Man, thoughtfully.
Kemp tried to think of something to keep the conversation
going, but the Invisible Man continued himself.
 Coming into your house, Kemp,  he said,  changes all my
plans. For you are a man who can understand. You are a scientist.
You have told no one I am here?   Not a soul. 
 If we are to make any use of being invisible, we must start by
killing. 
 Killing?  repeated Kemp.  I m listening to your plan; but I m
not agreeing. Why killing? 
 The point is this: they know as well as we do that there is an
Invisible Man — and that Invisible Man, Kemp, must now start to
rule by terror. Yes; I mean it. To rule by terror. He must take a
town like your Burdock and put the fear of God into it. He must
give orders. He can do that in many ways. And he must kill
everybody who disobeys his orders, and everybody who works
against him. 
 Really!  said Kemp, no longer listening to Griffin, but to the
sound of his front door opening and closing.
The Invisible Man had also heard the sound.  Listen!  he said.
 What is that downstairs? 
 Nothing,  said Kemp; and suddenly he began to speak loud
and fast.  I don t agree to this, Griffin,  he said.  Understand me, I
don t agree to this. Why do you wish to be alone? Why not tell
everyone? Think how much better it would be. You might have a
million helpers. 
The Invisible Man raised his hand.  There are footsteps
coming upstairs,  he said.
 Nonsense,  said Kemp.
 Let me see,  said the Invisible Man, and went to the door and
listened.
And then things happened very quickly. Suddenly the clothes
sat down and opened as the unseen man began to undress.
Kemp opened the door.
As he opened it, there came sounds of hurrying feet and
voices downstairs.
With a quick movement Kemp pushed the Invisible Man
back, jumped aside, and shut the door behind him. The key was
     Kemp took some time to explain to Colonel Adye what had
happened.
 He s mad,  said Kemp.  And evil. He thinks of nothing but his
own advantage, his own safety. I ve listened this morning to a
terrible story of cruelty and pride. He has wounded men. He ll
kill them unless we can prevent him. He plans to rule by terror. Nothing can stop him. He s loose outside there now — and he s
mad! 
 He must be caught,  said Adye.  That s certain. 
 But how?  cried Kemp, and suddenly became full of ideas.
 You must begin immediately; you must set every man to work;
you must prevent him leaving this place. If he gets away, he may
go through the country, killing as he goes. The only thing that
may keep him here is the thought of finding some books which
he values very much. I will tell you about them. There is a man in
your police station — Marvel. 
 I know,  said Adye,  I know. Those books - yes. But the
Invisible Man— 
 Says he hasn t got them. But he thinks Marvel has. Now
listen! You must prevent him from eating or sleeping — day and
night the country must be on the watch for him. Food must be
locked up, all food, so that he will have to break into a house or
shop to get it. The houses everywhere must be shut against him;
for    miles round Port Burdock, the whole country must begin
hunting and keep on hunting. I tell you, Adye, he s dangerous.
Unless he is caught, it s terrible to think of the things that may
happen. 
 Come along,  said Colonel Adye.  Tell me as we go. What else
is there we can do? 
In another moment Adye was leading the way downstairs.
They found the front door open and the policemen standing
outside staring at empty air.
 He s got away, sir,  said one.
 We must tell the police station at once,  said Adye.  One of you
must go down and report and then come up and meet us —
quickly. And now, Kemp, what else? 
 Dogs,  said Kemp.  Get dogs. They don t see him, but they
smell him. Get dogs. 
 Good,  said Adye.  We have no suitable dogs, but the prison
     
outside and ready. In another moment Griffin would have been
locked in the room, except for one little thing: the key fell noisily
on the floor.
Kemp s face became white. He tried to hold the door handle
with both hands. For a moment he pulled at it. Then the door
opened slightly, but he got it closed again. The second time it was
opened a foot, and the clothes came into the opening. Kemp s
throat was seized by invisible fingers, and he let go of the handle
in order to defend himself. He was forced back and thrown
heavily to the floor.
Halfway up the stairs was Colonel Adye, the chief of the
Burdock police. He was staring at the sudden appearance of
Kemp, followed by the clothes, which danced in the air. He saw
Kemp fall and then struggle to his feet. He saw Kemp rush
forward, and go down again.
Then suddenly he was struck. By nothing! A great weight, it
seemed, jumped on him, and he was thrown down the staircase.
An invisible foot stepped on his back, faint steps passed
downstairs. He heard the two police officers in the hall shout and
run, and the sound of the front door of the house as it shut.
He rolled over and sat up staring. He saw Kemp coming down
the staircase, his face white and bleeding.
 My God!  cried Kemp, I couldn t stop him! He s gone! 
Chapter   
The Hunt for the Invisible Manofficers over at Halstead know a man with bloodhounds. What
else? 
 Remember,  said Kemp,  his food shows. You can see it for
some time after he has eaten it, so he has to hide. You must keep
on searching in every quiet corner. And put away all weapons —
and everything that might be a weapon. He can t carry such
things for long. You must hide anything he can pick up and strike
men with. 
 Good again,  said Adye.  We ll find him yet! 
 And the roads-  said Kemp, and hesitated.
 Yes?  said Adye.
 Broken glass,  said Kemp.  It s cruel, I know. But think of what
he may do! 
Adye drew the air in between his teeth sharply.
 It s cruel. I don t perhaps think we should. But I ll have some
broken glass ready. If he is killed, it will be only what he deserves. 
 The man is mad, I tell you,  said Kemp.  He will do anything.
We must catch him by any possible means. He has cut himself off
from the human race. 
him in every direction. In the morning he had still been just a
story, a terror; in the afternoon, mainly because of Kemp s story,
he was shown to be a real enemy who had to be caught and held
by force, and the countryside began organising itself very quickly.
Before two o clock, he might still have escaped from the area by
boarding a train, but after two that became impossible: every
passenger train between Southampton, Winchester, Brighton and
Horsham travelled with locked doors, and the goods trains were
almost entirely stopped. And in a great circle of    miles round
Port Burdock, men armed with guns and sticks were soon setting
out in groups of three and four, with dogs, to search the roads
and fields.
The Invisible Man seems to have rushed out of Kemp s house in
blind anger. A little child playing near Kemp s gateway was
violently picked up and thrown to one side — so that his leg was
broken — and then for some hours the Invisible Man disappeared
completely. No one knows where he went or what he did. But
we can think of him hurrying through the hot June morning, up
the hill and onto the open land behind Port Burdock, and hiding
at last in the woods.
There he hid for two hours, while a growing crowd of men
was hunting him across the country with dogs, and searching for Police on horseback followed the country roads, stopping at
every house and warning people to lock their doors and not to
go out unless they were armed. All the schools had closed before
three o clock, and the frightened children, keeping together in
groups, hurried home. A notice written by Kemp was put up
everywhere, telling people clearly what must be done — that the
Invisible Man must have neither food nor sleep, that a continuous
watch must be kept for signs of him. Before night the whole
country was on guard and also before night came news of the
murder of Mr Wicksteed.
Somewhere on the road the Invisible Man must have picked
up an iron bar. Mr Wicksteed, a quiet, harmless man on his way
home from work, had, no doubt, seen an iron bar walking by
itself, and had turned to follow it. Perhaps the Invisible Man
imagined he was one of the hunters. We only know that he
stopped quiet little Mr Wicksteed, attacked him, broke his arm,
knocked him down and beat his head to pieces.
Then there is the story of a voice heard by some men in a
field, laughing and crying. Across the field it went and was lost.
The Invisible Man must have seen the use Kemp had made of his
story. He must have found all the houses shut and locked, and
     
Chapter    
T h e W i c k s t e e d Murderseen the groups of men with dogs watching. He knew that he
was a hunted man. In the night he must have eaten and slept, for
on the last morning he was himself again and ready for his
struggle against the world.
Chapter   
The Attack on Kemp s House
Kemp was reading a strange letter, written in pencil on a dirty
sheet of paper.
You have been very clever, though what you gain by it I cannot think. You
are against me. For a whole day you have hunted me — you have tried to
rob me of a night s rest. But I have had food, I have slept, and we are
only beginning. We are only beginning. There is nothing to be done but to
start the Terror. This is the first day of the Terror. Port Burdock is no
longer under the Queen. Tell your police, and the rest of them; it is under
me — the Terror! I am Invisible Man the First. We shall begin with the
death of a man named Kemp. He will die today. He may hide himself
away, and collect guards around him; Death, the unseen Death, is
coming. The game begins. Death starts. If you help him, my people, Death
may fall on you too. Today Kemp is to die.
Kemp read this letter twice.  That s his voice!  he said,  and he
means it. 
He got up slowly, leaving his lunch unfinished - the letter had
come by the one o clock post — and went into his study. He rang
the bell for his servant, and told her to go round the house
immediately, and see that all the windows were shut. He closed
the study windows himself. From a locked drawer in his
bedroom he took a little revolver, examined it carefully, and put it
into his pocket. He wrote a number of short notes, one to
Colonel Adye, and gave them to his servant to take.
  
 There is no danger to you,  he said. He thought for a time and
then returned to his meal.
Finally he struck the table.  We will have him!  he said.  He ll
go too far. 
He went up to his room, carefully shutting every door after
him.  It s a game,  he said,  a strange game — but I shall win, Mr
Griffin,  he said.
He stood at the window staring at the hot hillside.  He must
get food every day. Did he really sleep last night? Out in the open
somewhere? I wish we could get some good cold, wet weather
instead of the heat. He may be watching me now. 
He went close to the window. Something hit the wall above
the window.
 I m getting worried,  said Kemp. But it was five minutes
before he went to the window again.  It must have been a bird, 
he said.
Soon he heard the front-door bell ringing and hurried
downstairs. He unchained and unlocked the door, and opened it
without showing himself. It was Adye.
 Your servant s been attacked, Kemp,  he said round the door.
 What!  exclaimed Kemp.
 She had that note of yours taken away from her. He s very
near. Let me in. 
Kemp opened the door a few inches, and Adye came in. He
stood in the hall, looking at Kemp locking the door.
Kemp swore.  What a fool I was!  he said.  I might have known.
Already! 
 What s the matter?  said Adye.
 Look here!  said Kemp, and led the way towards his study. He
handed Adye the Invisible Man s letter.
Adye read it,  And you-?  said Adye.
The sound of a breaking window came from upstairs. Adye
saw the little revolver half out of Kemp s pocket.  It s a window
  upstairs!  said Kemp, and led the way up. There came a second
noise while they were still on the staircase. When they reached
the study they found two of the three windows broken, the floor
covered with broken glass, and one big stone lying on the writing
table. The two men stopped in the doorway. Kemp swore again,
and as he did so the third window broke with a crack like a
gunshot, and the broken glass fell into the room.
 What s this for?  said Adye.
 It s beginning,  said Kemp.
 There s no way of climbing up here? 
 Not even for a cat,  said Kemp.
Stones came flying in and then it sounded as if someone was
banging on the windows downstairs. The two men stood outside
the study, not knowing what to do.
 I know!  said Adye.  Let me have a stick or something, and I ll
go down to the station and get the man with the bloodhounds.
They ll find him. 
Another window broke.
 You haven t got a revolver?  asked Adye.
Kemp s hand went to his pocket. Then he paused.  I haven t
one — at least, none that I want to part with. 
 I ll bring it back,  said Adye.  You ll be safe here. 
Kemp gave him the weapon.
 Now for the door,  said Adye.
As they stood waiting in the hall, they heard one of the
bedroom windows crack. Kemp went to the door and began to
turn the key as silently as he could. His face was a little paler than
usual.
something moved near him.
 Stop a bit,  said a Voice, and Adye stopped, with his hand on
the revolver.
 Well?  said Adye.
 Please go back to the house,  said the Voice.
 No,  said Adye. He thought of trying a shot in the direction of
the Voice.
 What are you going to do?  said the Voice.
 What I do is my own business,  said Adye.
The words were still on his lips when an arm came round his
neck, he felt a knee in his back, and his head was forced
backward. He fired the gun wildly, and in another moment he
was struck in the mouth and the weapon was taken from his
hand. He tried to struggle, and was thrown on his back.
 You devil!  said Adye.
The Voice laughed.  I would kill you now if it wasn t a waste of
a shot,  it said. Adye saw the revolver in the air,   feet off, pointing
 You must step straight out,  he said.
In another moment Adye was on the doorstep and the door
was shut. He waited for a moment, feeling more comfortable
with his back against the door. Then he marched down the steps.
He crossed the grass and had almost reached the gate when at him.
 Well?  said Adye, sitting up.
 Get up,  said the Voice.
Adye stood up.
 Stand still,  said the Voice, and then firmly.  Don t try any
tricks. Remember I can see your face, if you can t see mine.
You ve got to go back to the house. 
 He won t let me in,  said Adye.
 That s a pity,  said the Invisible Man.  It isn t you I want to kill. 
Adye glanced away from the revolver and saw the sea far off,
very blue and dark under the bright sun. He saw the smooth
green hill, the white rocks of the coast, and the spreading town,
and suddenly he knew that life was very sweet. His eyes came
back to this little metal thing hanging between heaven and earth,
six feet away.  What must I do?  he asked.
 What must I do?  asked the Invisible Man.  If I let you go,
     you ll get help. The only thing is for you to go back to the house. 
 I ll try. If he lets me in, will you promise not to charge the
door? 
 I don t want to fight you,  said the Voice.
Kemp had hurried upstairs after letting Adye out, and now,
looking through a broken window, he saw Adye stand talking
with the unseen enemy.  Why doesn t he fire?  said Kemp to
himself. Then the revolver moved a little.
 That s strange!  he said.  Adye has given up the revolver. 
 Promise not to charge the door,  Adye was saying.  Give me a
chance. 
 Just go back to the house. I tell you I ll promise nothing. 
Adye seemed to decide suddenly. He turned towards the
house, and walked slowly with his hands behind him. Kemp
watched him. The revolver appeared, a small dark object,
following Adye. Then things happened very quickly. Adye
jumped at the small object, missed it, threw up his hands and fell
forward on his face. A little ball of blue smoke rose into the air.
Kemp did not hear the sound of the shot. Adye raised himself on
one arm, fell forward, and lay still.
For a time Kemp remained looking at Adye as he lay
peacefully on the grass. The day was very hot and still. Nothing
seemed to move. Adye lay on the grass near the gate. The curtains
of all the houses down the hill road were drawn, but in one little
green garden hut was a white figure, rather like an old man
asleep. Kemp s eyes returned to Adye — the game was not
beginning well!
Then came a ringing and a knocking at the front door, but
nobody opened it. Silence followed. Kemp sat listening and then
began to look carefully out of the three windows, one after
another. He went to the stairs and stood listening anxiously. What
was his enemy doing?
Suddenly there was a banging from below. He waited and
  
went down the stairs again. The house was filled with the sound
of heavy blows and breaking wood. He went into the kitchen.
The door was being broken down with an axe.
Kemp went back into the passage, trying to think. In a
moment the Invisible Man would be in the kitchen. This door
would not keep him a moment, and the—
The front-door bell rang again and Kemp heard voices. It was
the policemen with the servant. He ran into the hall, opened the
door, and three people fell into the house in a pile. Kemp shut
the door again.
 The Invisible Man!  said Kemp.  He has a revolver — with two
shots left. He s killed Adye. At least, he s shot him. Didn t you see
him on the grass? He s lying there. 
 Who?  said one of the policemen.
 Adye,  said Kemp.
 We came round the back way,  said the girl.
 What s that banging?  asked one of the policemen.
 He s in the kitchen — or will be. He s found an axe— 
Suddenly the house was full of the sound of the Invisible
Man s blows on the kitchen door. The girl stared towards the
kitchen and stepped into the dining room. Kemp tried to explain
in broken sentences. They heard the kitchen door breaking open.
 This way,  cried Kemp, and he pushed the policemen into the
dining room doorway.
 The pokers,  said Kemp, and rushed to the fire.
He handed a poker to each of the policemen.
He suddenly threw himself backwards.  Whup!  said one
policeman, jumped to one side and caught the axe on his poker.
sun and Arthur could not see the sky. After a long time they came to an open place in the
mountains. There were no trees, but Arthur saw a strange lake. The water was very blue
and there were flowers next to it.
‘Now go to the lake,’ Merlin told Arthur. So Arthur left his horse with Merlin and walked
down to the magic lake. He looked across the quiet blue water - and there, in the centre ofthe lake, he suddenly saw an arm with a beautiful sword in its hand.
‘Go and take it,’ said Merlin. ‘It is the sword Excalibur. The Lady of the Lake made it for
you. She lives in her home in the water of the lake.’
A lovely young woman walked across the water and stood on the ground next to King
Arthur.
‘I am the Lady of the Lake. Your sword, Excalibur, is waiting for you.’
There was a boat on the water. King Arthur got into it and went to the middle of the
lake. He took the sword, and the arm went into the water. When Arthur came back to
Merlin, the Lady of the Lake was not there.
The sword was inside a scabbard. It was a very beautiful thing.
‘That is a magic scabbard,’ said Merlin. ‘No man can kill a person with that scabbard.
Have it with you always, because an evil woman will try to take the scabbard and the
sword away from you.’
King Arthur and Merlin went home again. Arthur’s knights listened happily to the stories
of his journey.
Chapter  
Morgan le Fay
Morgan le Fay was a queen, with a castle in the country of Gorres. She was a very bad
woman. She could do magic, but she only used her magic for bad things. King Arthur did
not know that Morgan le Fay hated him. She wanted King Arthur to die.
‘She is a kind friend,’ thought King Arthur. He did not know about her evil plans.
One day he went out on his horse to the woods. He wanted to catch animals, so he did
not take his sword. He left Excalibur with Queen Morgan le Fay at her castle.
‘I will come and get it on my way home,’ he told her.
Arthur went on his horse in front of his men. He went a long way into the dark woods
and then he could not find the way out again. When night came, he could not see his men
anywhere.
Arthur came to a lake. Then he saw a small light on the lake and he moved nearer and
nearer to it. The light was in a beautiful ship.
‘I will go onto the ship,’ thought Arthur.
When he was inside, he saw food and drink on the table and a bed. But he could not
see anybody there.
It was late and King Arthur was tired. ‘I will stay here tonight,’ he thought. ‘In the
morning I will find my way out of the woods. Then I will get Excalibur, and go home.’
So he late a good dinner on the ship and then he went to sleep. But when he woke up
in the morning, he was not in the ship. He was in a little room with a very small window. Hedid not know this place. The door was shut, so he could not get out. There were three
knights in the room.
‘This is the castle of Sir Damas. He is a very evil knight. He caught us too, and put us
here,’ one of the knights told Arthur. Sir Damas wants us to fight for him. Then we can
leave the castle. Or we will stay here and die.’
Some men came and took Arthur into a great room. Sir Damas was there.
‘Will you fight for me?’ Sir Damas asked. ‘That is a difficult question. Sir Damas,’
answered King Arthur. ‘I will fight for you. But when I win, I want those three knights. Then
we will all leave your castle.’
‘Yes,’ answered Sir Damas. ‘Fight for me and you can take the three knights with you.’
‘I will have to have a horse and a sword,’ King Arthur said.
Then a man came into the room. He brought a sword and gave it to Arthur.
‘This sword is from Queen Morgan le Fay. It is for you. King Arthur. You left it with her
and she heard about your fight to
The other knight also did not know King Arthur under his helmet.
The fight began. King Arthur was not happy. He could not hurt the other knight with his
sword, because the sword was not Excalibur! It was a sword from Morgan le Fay’s magic.
It looked the same as Excalibur, but it was different. When the other knight hit Arthur with
his sword, it hurt him. Arthur felt very weak.
‘His sword is very strong,’ thought Arthur.
King Arthur was very brave and he did not stop fighting. Many people came and
watched the fight. But then Arthur’s sword broke. He fell onto the ground.
‘Sir!’ the other knight cried.’ Say that I am the winner! Then I will not kill you!’
‘No!’ cried Arthur. ‘I will fight - and fight.’
King Arthur took the end of his sword. He hit the knight on the head as hard as he could
with it. The knight fell back and hit the ground. His sword fell from his hand, and Arthur
quickly took it. When he felt the sword in his hand, he knew. It was Excalibur!
Then Arthur saw his scabbard next to the knight. He jumped up and took that too.
‘Tell me — who are you? What is your name?’ asked Arthur.
The knight stood up and answered, ‘I am Sir Accolon, Knight of the Round Table. I amone of King Arthur’s knights.’
‘Tell me — why did you fight me, your king?’
‘Sir, I did not know you. I came here because Queen Morgan le Fay sent me. She said
to me, “King Arthur is in the castle of Sir Damas. You have to go and fight Sir Damas.
Then he will not kill your king.” Now I know that you are not Sir Damas. I am very sorry,’
said Sir Accolon.
‘And who gave you that sword?’ asked Arthur.
‘Queen Morgan le Fay gave it to me. She said, “Here is King Arthur’s sword, Excalibur,
and its scabbard. Take them for the fight. Then you will fight well and your king can leave
the castle of that evil knight, Sir Damas.”‘
King Arthur was very angry when he heard Accolon’s story. ‘I know now that you did not
want to kill me. Sir Accolon. You are a brave knight. Now I understand Morgan le Fay’s evil
plan. I had a conversation with Merlin, the man of good magic. I have to be careful with my
sword and scabbard, he said. But I did not listen.’
‘Now pull it out,’ he said to Arthur.
Arthur pulled it out. It came out as easily as a knife out of butter. Sir Ector saw this and
took Arthur’s hand.
‘You are my king,’ he said.
Only the next king can pull the sword out of the stone. Many people try, but they cannot
move the sword. Then young Arthur tries, and it comes out easily. Now he will be king. But
will he be a good king? Will his people love him? And will his life be happy?
The story of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table is very, very old. People
know that there was a king in Britain between the years     and    . He fought the
Saxons, from countries in the north of Europe, and perhaps this king was Arthur. He lived,
perhaps, in Wales or in the west of England — in Somerset or Cornwall.
People wrote stories about this king hundreds of years later, but they made the stories
more interesting and more exciting. At that time people were interested in magic, knights
and their ladies. So people fight with swords and use magic in these stories.
Who wrote these first stories? Nobody really knows, but different people in France and
Britain wrote about King Arthur and his knights. Not every book about them has the same
people and stories in it. One book (    ), by Sir Thomas Malory, is very famous. He used
French stories about King Arthur and wrote them in English.Chapter  
Arthur and Merlin
This very old story begins with Uther, a great king. He was a good man and he was king in
the south of Britain. Other places were very dangerous at that time, but people did not fight
in Uther’s country. Uther loved a beautiful woman, Igraine, and he wanted to marry her.
But she did not love him and he was very sad about that.
Merlin was a very clever man and he knew a lot of magic. He could change into an
animal or bird. Sometimes, when he used magic, nobody could see him. He also helped
people with his magic, and one day he came to King Uther.
‘You can marry Igraine,’ he said. ‘I will help you. But when you have a child, you will
have to give the boy to me.’
‘I will give him to you,’ said the King. He married Igraine and later they had a baby
son. They called him Arthur. When Arthur was three days old, a very old man arrived at
the door of the King’s house. It was Merlin. King Uther took the child in his arms and gave
him to Merlin. Merlin took the child away. He gave the boy, Arthur, to a good knight. His
name was Sir* Ector. So Arthur lived with Sir Ector and his son, Kay, and the two boys
were brothers.
A short time after this happened King Uther was very ill. He did not get better. He called for
Merlin because he wanted to talk about the future of his country. Merlin came and listened
to the King.
‘I know that I am going to die,’ King Uther said. ‘Who will be king after me?’
‘Call your knights and great men,’ Merlin told the King. ‘Tell them, "My son, Arthur, will
be the next king!”‘
King Uther told his people this before he died. But a lot of people wanted to be king, so
the knights and great men began to fight. There was no new king for a long time.
When Arthur was a young man. Merlin went to London. He visited the Archbishop, the
most important man in the Church.
‘Call the knights to London. Then we will find the new king,’ Merlin told the Archbishop.
The knights came to London. They met at a large church, and the Archbishop spoke to
them. When they came outside, they saw something strange in front of the church. It was
a very large stone with a great sword in it. The sun shone on the sword and it looked very
strong. The knights were excited, and started to talk about it.
* Sir is name for a knight.‘ Where did it come from?’
‘How did it get here?’
‘Who brought the stone here? We didn’t see anybody. And who put the sword in it?’
On the stone were these words:
ONLY THE KING
CAN TAKE THE SWORD FROM THE STONE
Every knight tried to pull the sword out of the stone. Nobody could do it — the sword did
not come out. The knights pulled and pulled. But they could not move the sword.
‘Our king is not here,’ said the Archbishop. ‘But I know that we will find him.’
Ten knights stayed and watched the stone. The Archbishop invited all the great men in
the country to London for a big fight. There were many big fights at that time. People
fought on horses with swords in their hands. The strongest and best knight always won.
‘Perhaps the new king will come to the fight,’ thought the Archbishop.
Sir Ector went to the fight with his two sons, Sir Kay and young Arthur. Arthur was now
sixteen years old. The young men wanted to fight with the other knights, but Sir Kay did
not have a sword. Arthur was a kind young man. He wanted to help.
‘There is a sword in a stone outside a church. I saw it on the way here. I will get it and
fight with it. Then you can have my sword,’ he said to his brother.
Arthur left Sir Kay and quickly went to the church. There were no knights outside by the
stone because they were at the fight. Arthur climbed down from his horse and went to the
stone. He did not read the words on the stone. He took the sword in his hand and pulled. It
came out of the stone easily.
He ran back to his horse with the sword. Some minutes later he met Sir Kay and Sir
Ector again, and he showed them the sword.
‘Where did that sword come from?’ Sir Ector asked. He knew about the words on the
stone.
They went back to the place outside the church, and Sir Ector put the sword in the
stone again.
‘Now pull it out,’ he said to Arthur.
Arthur pulled it out. It came out as easily as a knife out of butter. Sir Ector saw this and
took Arthur’s hand. ‘You are my king,’ he said.
Arthur did not understand. What did his father mean? ‘Arthur,’ Sir Ector said slowly, ‘I
love you very much, but I am not really your father. Merlin, the famous man of magic,
brought you to me when you were a small child. I took you into my family because he
asked me. Now I know that you are the king.’He took the sword in his hand and pulled.‘I will try to be a good king,’ said Arthur. ‘And I will listen to your words, because you are
my father. Sir Kay, my brother, you will be an important knight and a friend to me.’
Then they went to the Archbishop and told him everything. The knights were angry.
They did not think that Arthur was really the king. So the Archbishop called all the knights
to the stone.
Arthur put the sword back into the stone. Every knight tried again to take it out, but it did
not move. Then they watched and Arthur pulled it out easily.
Everybody shouted, ‘Arthur is our king! Arthur is our king!’

Many people came to see Arthur. They were all happy because now they had a kind, good
king. He was strong and he was not afraid.
Merlin told Arthur the story of his parents. ‘Your father was King Uther and your mother
was Queen Igraine. When you were a baby, I took you to Avalon, a magic place. You were
born with magic in your life. You will be the best knight and you will be the greatest king.
You will live for a very long time.’

So King Arthur began a new life. He took his horse and went through the country with his
knights. Sometimes they had to fight bad men but they were not afraid. Arthur was a good
king, and his knights were brave. His country was a quiet place again.
Chapter  
The Round Table
King Arthur went to the north and the east with his knights and fought the Saxons. Then
they came back and stopped in the town of Camelot. Arthur made it the most important
town in the country. It was now his home, and the home of his brave knights.
One day King Arthur visited his friend, King Leodegraunce. He had a daughter and she
was the most beautiful woman in England. The daughter’s name was Guinevere. When he
went back to Camelot, Arthur could not stop thinking about her.
‘I love Guinevere and I want to marry her,’ Arthur told Merlin. King Leodegraunce was
very happy. Arthur was a good and brave man — a good husband for his lovely daughter.
So Arthur and Guinevere went to church and the Archbishop married them. Everybody
enjoyed a wonderful party in Camelot.
Then Merlin made a large round table for King Arthur’s knights in Camelot. There were
    places at the great wood and stone table. King Arthur gave his best and bravest
knights a place at the Round Table. Each knight had his place at the table, but no chair
was better than another chair. Nobody sat at the top of a round table and nobody sat atthe bottom.
‘The names of the Knights of the Round Table will be famous!’ cried Merlin.

Some knights died and other brave and good knights came to Camelot. One day a new
knight, Sir Pellinore, arrived at Camelot, and Arthur gave him a place at the Round Table.
For a long time there was one place with no knight. Merlin could see into the future.
‘Only a good knight, your best knight, will sit there,’ Merlin told King Arthur. ‘The place is
for your best knight, and he will come to it.’
After many years Sir Galahad came and sat in that place at the Round Table.
Chapter  
The Sword, Excalibur
King Arthur went round the country on his horse. He met his people and helped them. One
day he came to a great wood. When evening came, King Arthur was not out of the wood.
Then he saw a very big, beautiful castle in front of him.
He went nearer, and the great door of the castle opened. A woman came out.
‘King Arthur,’ she said. ‘I am Queen Annoure. Stay in my castle. It is getting dark. I will
give you food and a bed for the night.’
Arthur was hungry and thirsty. He was also tired. He looked at the dark sky. ‘Thank
you,’ he said, and he went in.
The Queen was kind to Arthur. She took his horse and gave it food and water. She took
Arthur to the dining-room of her castle and gave him bread, meat and wine. Then one of
Queen Annoure’s men took the King to his bedroom, and Arthur went to sleep.

The next morning, after breakfast, Queen Annoure wanted to see Arthur.
‘I would like to show you my castle and the beautiful things in it,’ she said. ‘I am the
richest person in the world. Look — everything here is mine.’
Arthur looked at her castle. They went from room to room, and each room was richer
than the room before that. There were beautiful things everywhere. Queen Annoure knew
a lot of magic, so she could make beautiful things.
Then they came out on to the top of the castle.
‘Look at those beautiful trees and gardens,’ said the Queen. ‘And look at those woods.
They are mine too. This is my country. And can you see that great wall round the castle?
Stay with me and be king here! You cannot leave. The door of the castle is shut, and that
great wall will stop you. My men are ready. Do not leave, or they will kill you.’
‘Your magic cannot hurt me, and your men cannot kill me,’ answered King Arthur.Then, with his sword in his hand and his helmet on his head, Arthur went out of the
castle, and through the door in the great wall. Nobody could stop him.

Queen Annoure sent one of her men to Sir Pellinore. He lived near her castle, and he had
a place at King Arthur’s Round Table.
‘Queen Annoure says that a very bad knight is on his way to her castle. He wants to kill
her and take her money. He is very near here, and he will go past your house. Please go
out and fight him for my queen,’ the man said to Sir Pellinore.
So Pellinore sat on his horse and waited. He did not know that King Arthur was the
‘very bad knight’. Arthur met Pellinore on the road.
‘Sir! Knight!’ cried Arthur. ‘Why are you waiting here? Do you want to fight me?’
‘Yes!’ shouted Sir Pellinore, and he took his sword in his hand.
Pellinore hit the King with his sword and Arthur fell from his horse. He stood up. He was
very angry and pulled out his sword. They had a long fight, and then the King’s sword
broke.
‘Ha!’ cried Sir Pellinore. ‘That is the end of the fight! I can kill you now!’
Arthur threw down his sword. He ran at Sir Pellinore and threw him on to the ground.
The two men were very tired, but they fought for a little longer. Then Arthur put his foot on
Pellinore’s head. Arthur took the helmet from his head, so Pellinore could see his face.
‘Shall I kill you? ‘ Arthur said.
Pellinore looked up and saw Arthur’s face.
‘My King!’ he cried. ‘I did not know it was you! Queen Annoure wanted me to fight a bad
knight on this road.’
‘I am not that bad knight! But I know you did not want to kill your king,’ said King Arthur.
Then the two men were friends again.

Sir Pellinore hurt King Arthur in the fight, so Merlin visited Arthur. In three days Arthur was
well again.
‘My sword broke in the fight,’ Arthur told Merlin.
‘That sword was not important,’ said Merlin. ‘ Come with me and you will find the best
sword in the world. It is a magic sword from Avalon, the place of magic.’
The King went with Merlin through a dark wood. The trees shut out the light from the
sun and Arthur could not see the sky. After a long time they came to an open place in the
mountains. There were no trees, but Arthur saw a strange lake. The water was very blue
and there were flowers next to it.
‘Now go to the lake,’ Merlin told Arthur. So Arthur left his horse with Merlin and walked
down to the magic lake. He looked across the quiet blue water - and there, in the centre ofthe lake, he suddenly saw an arm with a beautiful sword in its hand.
‘Go and take it,’ said Merlin. ‘It is the sword Excalibur. The Lady of the Lake made it for
you. She lives in her home in the water of the lake.’
A lovely young woman walked across the water and stood on the ground next to King
Arthur.
‘I am the Lady of the Lake. Your sword, Excalibur, is waiting for you.’
There was a boat on the water. King Arthur got into it and went to the middle of the
lake. He took the sword, and the arm went into the water. When Arthur came back to
Merlin, the Lady of the Lake was not there.
The sword was inside a scabbard. It was a very beautiful thing.
‘That is a magic scabbard,’ said Merlin. ‘No man can kill a person with that scabbard.
Have it with you always, because an evil woman will try to take the scabbard and the
sword away from you.’
King Arthur and Merlin went home again. Arthur’s knights listened happily to the stories
of his journey.
Chapter  
Morgan le Fay
Morgan le Fay was a queen, with a castle in the country of Gorres. She was a very bad
woman. She could do magic, but she only used her magic for bad things. King Arthur did
not know that Morgan le Fay hated him. She wanted King Arthur to die.
‘She is a kind friend,’ thought King Arthur. He did not know about her evil plans.
One day he went out on his horse to the woods. He wanted to catch animals, so he did
not take his sword. He left Excalibur with Queen Morgan le Fay at her castle.
‘I will come and get it on my way home,’ he told her.
Arthur went on his horse in front of his men. He went a long way into the dark woods
and then he could not find the way out again. When night came, he could not see his men
anywhere.
Arthur came to a lake. Then he saw a small light on the lake and he moved nearer and
nearer to it. The light was in a beautiful ship.
‘I will go onto the ship,’ thought Arthur.
When he was inside, he saw food and drink on the table and a bed. But he could not
see anybody there.
It was late and King Arthur was tired. ‘I will stay here tonight,’ he thought. ‘In the
morning I will find my way out of the woods. Then I will get Excalibur, and go home.’
So he late a good dinner on the ship and then he went to sleep. But when he woke up
in the morning, he was not in the ship. He was in a little room with a very small window. Hedid not know this place. The door was shut, so he could not get out. There were three
knights in the room.
‘This is the castle of Sir Damas. He is a very evil knight. He caught us too, and put us
here,’ one of the knights told Arthur. Sir Damas wants us to fight for him. Then we can
leave the castle. Or we will stay here and die.’
Some men came and took Arthur into a great room. Sir Damas was there.
‘Will you fight for me?’ Sir Damas asked. ‘That is a difficult question. Sir Damas,’
answered King Arthur. ‘I will fight for you. But when I win, I want those three knights. Then
we will all leave your castle.’
‘Yes,’ answered Sir Damas. ‘Fight for me and you can take the three knights with you.’
‘I will have to have a horse and a sword,’ King Arthur said.
Then a man came into the room. He brought a sword and gave it to Arthur.
‘This sword is from Queen Morgan le Fay. It is for you. King Arthur. You left it with her
and she heard about your fight to
King Arthur went back to Sir Damas s castle with Sir Accolon, and they found the three
knights. There was a great fight with Sir Damas, arid King Arthur won with Excalibur. But
after the fight he had a lot of wounds.
‘Bring Sir Damas to me!‘ said the King.
Sir Damas came to King Arthur.
‘Why did you want me to fight for you? Why did I have to fight Sir Accolon, one of my
knights?‘ King Arthur asked him.
‘Because Queen Morgan le Fay wanted it,’ answered Sir Damas.
‘You are not a brave man,’ said Arthur, ‘and now you will not be a knight. I am taking
your castle from you, and everything in it. I am going to give it to your younger brother.’
Then King Arthur left. He did not go to Camelot because he wanted to get well first.

Morgan le Fay went to stay at Camelot, and King Arthur was not there.
‘King Arthur is dead now!‘ she thought. But then her men came to Camelot, and they
told her about the fight. ‘King Arthur did not die in the fight,’ they said.
Morgan le Fay went to Queen Guinevere and said, ‘I have to go back to my country
now. My people want me there.’
Queen Guinevere knew nothing about Morgan le Fay’s magic and her evil ideas.
‘Don’t go,’ she answered. ‘The King is coming back to Camelot. I think he will be here
tomorrow or the next day. He will be happy when he sees you.’
‘No! No!‘ said Morgan le Fay. ‘I cannot stay — I have to go.’
And so she left Camelot on her black horse.
Morgan le Fay and her black horse did not stop that day or that night. When she met
people on her journey, she asked them:
‘Where is King Arthur? Tell me, where is the King?’
After a long time she heard about him.
‘The King is ill,’ a man told her. ‘He fought a knight at Sir Damas’s castle. The knight
wounded King Arthur, so he cannot go back to Camelot. He is staying with the nuns. They
are good women, and he will get better there with their help.’
The nuns worked for the church and helped people. They were very kind and lived in a
large, quiet house. People could stay there when they wanted their help.
Morgan le Fay said thank you to the man and went to visit the nuns.
‘I am on a long journey, and I am hungry and thirsty,’ she said. ‘Please can I eat
something?’
The nuns brought food and drink and gave it to Morgan le Fay.
‘Is there another visitor here?‘ she asked.
‘Yes,’ the nuns said. ‘King Arthur is here. A knight’s sword wounded him in a fight. He
will leave when his wounds are better. He is sleeping. You can speak to him when he
wakes up.’
‘Oh! The King!‘ Morgan le Fay cried. ‘I cannot wait because I have to go home. But
please, can I look at him? I love our king and I would like to see him!’
‘We cannot wake up the King! He is in his bed and he is ill,’ said one of the nuns.
‘Please, let me sit next to him for a minute or two. I want to see his face!‘ asked Morgan
le Fay again.
The nun thought about it. ‘Yes, all right. You can go and look at him. But do not make
any noise. Do not wake him up.’
Morgan le Fay went into King Arthur’s room. She stood next to him and watched him.
The King was asleep, but he had his hand on Excalibur. She could not take the sword
away because she did not want to wake him. Then she saw the scabbard at the end of the
bed. Quickly she took it and put it under her clothes. Nobody could see it there. She went
out of the room and said thank you and goodbye to the nuns. Then Morgan le Fay got on
her black horse and left.

Later, when King Arthur opened his eyes, he could not see the scabbard.
‘Something is wrong,’ he thought. ‘Where is the scabbard of my sword, Excalibur?’
He was very angry and called a nun. ‘Did anybody come into this room when I was
asleep?‘ he asked her.
‘Queen Morgan le Fay came,’ she said. ’But no other person. She could not stay, but
she came into the room. She loves you and she wanted to see your face.’‘Thank you,’ said the King. ‘Thank you for your help. I came here to your house when I
was ill. You were kind and good to me. My wounds are getting better. But I have to go now
— it is important! I have to follow Queen Morgan le Fay. When she visited me in my room,
she took the scabbard of my sword, Excalibur.’
The nuns did not want him to leave because he was not ready. But they helped him
onto his horse, and he left their house.

King Arthur did not stop for hours. Then he came to a river. There was a man there with
his animals.
‘Did anybody come this way?‘ asked the King.
‘Yes,’ answered the man. ‘A beautiful woman came on a black horse. She went across
the river here very quickly and did not stop.’
King Arthur went over the river, through woods and up a mountain. Then he looked
down, and he saw Morgan le Fay a long way away.
Morgan le Fay looked back and she saw the King. The ground was hard and there
were a lot of stones. She went across the stones and arrived at a lake. The lake was
black. No animal drank the water. No birds sang in the trees.
Queen Morgan le Fay got off her black horse and took out the scabbard of King
Arthur’s sword, Excalibur. She threw it into the water.
‘King Arthur will never have it!’ she cried. ‘That scabbard will not help him now when
men fight him. Nobody will find it here — at the bottom of this lake!‘
Then she quickly went away on her horse, back to her castle.
King Arthur followed Morgan le Fay and came to the same place. He could not see the
Queen.
‘Which way did she go?’ King Arthur thought. ‘Where did the horse go? I cannot follow
the horse’s feet across these stones.’ King Arthur looked and looked. He saw nothing, so
he went home to Camelot without his scabbard.
King Arthur had Excalibur. But because of the evil Queen, he did not have the magic
scabbard. It stayed at the bottom of the black lake and he never found it.
Chapter  
Vivien and Merlin
When King Arthur was a young man, Merlin, the man of magic helped him in every way.
He taught him to be a good king and a brave knight. Merlin helped Arthur to be kind to
everybody in his country, so they all loved him. With Merlin’s help, Arthur built the beautiful
city, Camelot. Camelot had roads and houses and a great castle.
Later, when Merlin was an old man, he came to King Arthur again.‘I have to say goodbye now,’ said Merlin. ‘Goodbye? Why, Merlin?‘ asked King Arthur. ‘I
am going to die,’ Merlin told him. ‘I will not always be here. In the future, when you make
mistakes, my magic will not help you.’
‘Oh Merlin!‘ said King Arthur sadly. ‘I do not want you to go!’
‘I am going down into a dark cave, and I cannot come back from that cave.’
‘But Merlin,’ King Arthur cried, ‘you know a lot of magic. Can you not stop this? Do you
have to die?’
‘I cannot stop it,’ answered Merlin. ‘You have to be a strong king without me now!‘

After Merlin spoke to King Arthur, Lady Vivien came to Camelot. Before this time, she lived
with the Lady of the Lake. The Lady of the Lake made Excalibur and she knew a lot of
magic.
Vivien learned magic from the Lady of the Lake. Then she went to Camelot and studied
with Merlin. When she knew all Merlin’s magic, she thought, ‘He is an old man. I cannot kill
him because his magic is strong. But I can send him away somewhere so he cannot come
back. Then I will have the greatest and strongest magic in the world.’
Vivien went on a long journey with Merlin to another country. They climbed a high grey
mountain and came to a dark place with a lot of trees and a small river. There they saw a
magic cave inside the mountain.
‘The mouth of the cave is open now,’ said Merlin to Vivien. ‘When you say the magic
words, the mouth of the cave will shut.’
‘I know these magic words. But which words will open it again?‘ asked Vivien.
‘I do not know,’ said Merlin.
‘I want to look inside the cave,’ Vivien said. ‘Please come with me. Show me the way.’
So Merlin went into the cave first, but Vivien ran out quickly. She shouted the magic
words, and the mouth of the cave shut loudly. Merlin was inside and could not get out.
Some people say that the great Merlin is there now, inside the cave. One day, they say,
somebody will break open the big stone door of the cave. Then Merlin will come out again
and help the world with his magic. He will, they say, teach everybody to be good and
happy.
But after that sad day, King Arthur had no help from his friend, Merlin.
Chapter  
Sir Meligrance
It was the month of May. The weather was warm and the sky was blue. The flowers
looked very beautiful in the sun.
Queen Guinevere called her ten knights and her ladies and said, ‘Let’s enjoy thisbeautiful day. We can look for some lovely spring flowers. Let’s take some food and drink
and have a party in the wood.’
So Guinevere left the castle with her knights and her ladies. Some boys from the castle
went with them and carried their things.
All day they enjoyed the sun. In the afternoon they sat under the tall green trees. They
ate and they talked. Then evening came.
‘Now let’s go home,’ the Queen said. ‘King Arthur is waiting for us at Camelot.’
They were all ready when suddenly twenty men with swords and helmets jumped out
from the trees.
‘Stand there and do not move!’ one of the men shouted. ‘Or we will kill you all!’
It was Sir Meligrance, with his men. He loved Queen Guinevere and he wanted to take
her to his castle.
‘I love you,’ he said, ’and you are here without the King!’
‘Sir Meligrance,’ cried the Queen. ‘King Arthur made you a Knight of the Round Table!
A knight has to be a good man. How can you take away your king’s wife?’
‘I only know that I love you. My men will help me. They will fight your knights,’ answered
Sir Meligrance.
Guinevere’s ten knights turned to Sir Meligrance.
‘We will not stand here when you take our queen away, Sir! We will stop you.’
Sir Meligrance and his men had better swords and helmets than Guinevere’s knights.
His men were ready — Guinevere’s men were only there for the flowers.
The tight began. Guinevere’s knights were brave and fought hard. But they could not
win. Sir Meligrance’s men were too strong for them. And there were twenty of them. They
wounded all Guinevere’s good knights in the fight.
‘Stop!’ cried Guinevere to her knights. ‘Or they will kill you.’ She looked at Sir
Meligrance. ‘All right. Sir Meligrance. I will come with you.’
She was very angry and afraid. ‘Come with me, my brave knights, to Sir Meligrance’s
castle.’
So Queen Guinevere and her people went to the castle, but first the Queen spoke to
one of the boys.
‘You have a good, fast horse,’ she said to him quietly. ‘Go quickly to Camelot! Tell the
King and Sir Lancelot!‘
Sir Meligrance saw the boy when he left, but his men could not catch him.

The boy arrived at Camelot and saw Sir Lancelot. Sir Lancelot was the strongest of King
Arthur’s knights. When he heard the story, Lancelot quickly put his helmet on his head and
took his sword.
‘I will go now to Sir Meligrance’s castle and find the Queen,’ said Sir Lancelot to theboy. ‘Go and tell the King.’
When Lancelot came near the castle, he thought, ‘Sir Meligrance’s men will wait next to
the road. They will come out when I go past. So I will not take the road - I will go through
the wood.’
Lancelot was right. Sir Meligrance’s men waited by the road, but they did not see the
knight.
Sir Meligrance saw Lancelot outside the castle. His men were by the road, and
suddenly he was afraid. Lancelot was brave and strong. He could fight Sir Meligrance and
win.
So Sir Meligrance went to Queen Guinevere and said, ‘Oh, my Queen, I am sorry!
Please say you are not angry with me. I will take you back to Camelot and I will fight for
King Arthur. I want to be a good knight.’
The Queen did not know about Lancelot and Sir Meligrance’s men so she answered,
‘Yes, you are sorry. I can see that. I will not be angry with you.’

When Lancelot arrived at the castle, Guinevere told him, ‘I am not angry with Meligrance
now. Let’s stay here tonight and we will go back to Camelot tomorrow morning.’
Sir Lancelot was very angry and Sir Meligrance knew it. ‘Sir Lancelot will kill me when
the Queen leaves this castle,’ he thought.
They ate in the castle’s great dining-room. When they finished dinner. Sir Meligrance
said to Lancelot, ‘I will take you to your room and you can sleep.’
He showed Lancelot into a room with a door in the floor. Sir Lancelot put his foot on the
door and it opened. He fell into a little room below the door and he could not climb up
again.
Sir Meligrance went to the Queen.
‘Sir Lancelot did not want to stay here. He went back to Camelot,’ he told her.

The next day Queen Guinevere went back to Camelot with Sir Meligrance. When they
arrived, they saw King Arthur.
‘Your knights are saying that Sir Meligrance took you away to his castle,’ said King
Arthur.
‘Yes,’ Queen Guinevere told King Arthur. ‘Meligrance took me to his castle and my
knights fought for me. But Meligrance had a lot of men and they were too strong for us. But
he is sorry, so I am not angry with him now.’
‘Tell me, Sir Meligrance,’ Arthur asked. ‘Are the Queens knights right? What happened
when you met Queen Guinevere in the wood with her knights and ladies?’
Sir Meligrance answered, ‘I did not take the Queen away. King Arthur. She came withme because she loves me.’
The King was very angry with Sir Meligrance.

A girl in Sir Meligrance’s castle carried food to Sir Lancelot every day. She liked him,
because he was strong and brave. So when Sir Meligrance took Guinevere to Camelot,
the girl opened the door in the floor. Sir Lancelot left the room and went quickly back to
King Arthur’s castle.
The King was with the Queen and his knights in the great dining-room when Sir
Lancelot came in. He saw Sir Meligrance there and was angry. He looked at Sir
Meligrance.
‘You took away Queen Guinevere to your castle,’ cried Sir Lancelot. ‘She is not angry
with you now, so I will not kill you for that. But now you say that she loves you. For this I
will kill you! I am the strongest of King Arthur’s knights, so I will fight you without a helmet.
But I will win!’
Sir Meligrance quickly moved closer to Sir Lancelot. He hit the other knight’s head with
his sword because he had no helmet. But Lancelot jumped away and cut Sir Meligrance’s
helmet in two. And Sir Meligrance fell to the ground - dead.
Chapter  
Sir Tristram
One day the King of Lyonesse went into the woods because he wanted to catch animals.
He made a long journey and at the end of the day he could not find the road home. His
queen waited in their castle, but he did not come back.
‘Where is the King?’ she thought. ‘He knows that I am going to have a child.’
So the Queen went out into the woods and looked for the King. She walked a long way
and began to feel very tired. In the evening she slept under a tree. There her baby boy
was born.
‘I am going to die,’ she thought. ‘I am very ill.’ She took the baby in her arms.
‘Oh, my little son,’ cried the Queen. ‘I will give you the name Tristram. It means "sad",
and I am sad. I know I am not going to live. But you, my dear child, will be a brave knight
when you are a man.’
The King found a way back to his castle, but the Queen was not there. His men went
into the woods and looked for her.
They found the Queen and the child under a tree and took them back to the castle. The
Queen told the King the baby’s name — and then she died.
For many days the King did not speak or eat. ‘He will die too,’ people said, ’and the little
boy Tristram will be our king.’ But after a long time the King began to enjoy life again.
Seven years later the King of Lyonesse married again, and the new queen had a son. She
loved her son very much, but she did not like Tristram, the son of her husband’s first wife.
One day the Queen thought of a plan. She made a drink for Tristram and put some
poison in it.
‘He will think it is wine,’ she thought. ‘But when he drinks it, he will die.’ She put the
glass on the table, ready for Tristram. ‘Everything is ready,’ she thought. ‘Good!’
But the Queen’s son came into the room before Tristram. He was very thirsty and he
drank from the glass. Then he fell on the floor and died.
The Queen tried to kill Tristram a second time. Again she put some poison into his
drink. She put the glass on the table and again waited for Tristram. This time the King
came into the room. He put his hand out to the glass of wine, but the Queen cried, ‘Do not
drink it!’
The King suddenly remembered his second son. There was poison in his drink! Then
he understood the Queen’s evil plan.
‘You wanted to kill Tristram, but your son drank the poison! So you tried to kill Tristram
again, but I nearly drank it!’ The King was very angry. ‘Make a fire! Take the Queen and
put her in it!’ he shouted to his men.
But when the fire was ready, Tristram came to his father. He fell down at his father’s
feet.
‘Father, do not do this! Take your wife back. Love her, and she will love you. She hates
me - so send me away. Then you will be happy again.’
So Tristram went to live with his father’s brother, Mark. Mark was King of Cornwall. He
loved Tristram and Tristram loved his uncle. He was happy there. When he arrived there,
Tristram was a boy. Some years later, he was a strong, brave man.

The King of Ireland also had a son. Sir Marhaus. Nobody could fight him and win. One
day, Sir Marhaus came across the sea to King Mark’s castle.
‘I am the best and strongest knight in Ireland! Send a knight to me and I will fight him.
Then you will see!’
Not one of King Mark’s knights wanted to fight Sir Marhaus.
Then Tristram went to his uncle and said, ‘I am not a boy now - I am a man. Make me a
knight and send me. I can fight Sir Marhaus and win.’
King Mark thought for a long time. ‘I do not want to send you, but the other knights will
not fight him,’ he said.
So the King made his brother’s son, Tristram, a knight and Tristram got ready for the
fight.
Many people came and watched the two men. They fought with their swords all day. SirMarhaus was strong, but he was older than Sir Tristram. He was not as quick on his feet.
He could not hit Tristram.
The sun was hot, and Sir Marhaus started to feel tired. Tristram’s sword cut through Sir
Marhaus’s helmet and killed him. His men took the dead man away to his ship.
Sir Marhaus also wounded Tristram badly in the fight, and the young man was very ill.
There was poison in the wound.
Nobody could make Sir Tristram’s wound better. After some time, an old woman came
and looked at it.
She said, ‘Ah! The poison in this wound came from Ireland. Send your knight there and
somebody will make him better.’
answered King Arthur. ‘I will fight for you. But when I win, I want those three knights. Then
we will all leave your castle.’
‘Yes,’ answered Sir Damas. ‘Fight for me and you can take the three knights with you.’
‘I will have to have a horse and a sword,’ King Arthur said.
Then a man came into the room. He brought a sword and gave it to Arthur.
‘This sword is from Queen Morgan le Fay. It is for you. King Arthur. You left it with her
and she heard about your fight today. She wants you to have Excalibur,’ said the man.
King Arthur looked at the sword. ‘Yes, this is Excalibur,’ he thought happily. No man
could kill him when he had the magic scabbard.
Sir Damas gave him food and drink and he got ready for the fight.

When Arthur was ready, he went outside. He saw another knight there, but he did not
know him. He could not see the knight’s face behind his helmet.
‘Who is this knight? Which castle does he come from? Which king sent him?’ thought
Arthur.
‘Now pull it out,’ he said to Arthur.
Arthur pulled it out. It came out as easily as a knife out of butter. Sir Ector saw this and
took Arthur’s hand.
‘You are my king,’ he said.
Only the next king can pull the sword out of the stone. Many people try, but they cannot
move the sword. Then young Arthur tries, and it comes out easily. Now he will be king. But
will he be a good king? Will his people love him? And will his life be happy?
The story of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table is very, very old. People
know that there was a king in Britain between the years     and    . He fought the
Saxons, from countries in the north of Europe, and perhaps this king was Arthur. He lived,
perhaps, in Wales or in the west of England — in Somerset or Cornwall.
People wrote stories about this king hundreds of years later, but they made the stories
more interesting and more exciting. At that time people were interested in magic, knights
and their ladies. So people fight with swords and use magic in these stories.
Who wrote these first stories? Nobody really knows, but different people in France and
Britain wrote about King Arthur and his knights. Not every book about them has the same
people and stories in it. One book (    ), by Sir Thomas Malory, is very famous. He used
French stories about King Arthur and wrote them in English.Chapter  
Arthur and Merlin
This very old story begins with Uther, a great king. He was a good man and he was king in
the south of Britain. Other places were very dangerous at that time, but people did not fight
in Uther’s country. Uther loved a beautiful woman, Igraine, and he wanted to marry her.
But she did not love him and he was very sad about that.
Merlin was a very clever man and he knew a lot of magic. He could change into an
animal or bird. Sometimes, when he used magic, nobody could see him. He also helped
people with his magic, and one day he came to King Uther.
‘You can marry Igraine,’ he said. ‘I will help you. But when you have a child, you will
have to give the boy to me.’
‘I will give him to you,’ said the King. He married Igraine and later they had a baby
son. They called him Arthur. When Arthur was three days old, a very old man arrived at
the door of the King’s house. It was Merlin. King Uther took the child in his arms and gave
him to Merlin. Merlin took the child away. He gave the boy, Arthur, to a good knight. His
name was Sir* Ector. So Arthur lived with Sir Ector and his son, Kay, and the two boys
were brothers.

A short time after this happened King Uther was very ill. He did not get better. He called for
Merlin because he wanted to talk about the future of his country. Merlin came and listened
to the King.
‘I know that I am going to die,’ King Uther said. ‘Who will be king after me?’
‘Call your knights and great men,’ Merlin told the King. ‘Tell them, "My son, Arthur, will
be the next king!”‘
King Uther told his people this before he died. But a lot of people wanted to be king, so
the knights and great men began to fight. There was no new king for a long time.

When Arthur was a young man. Merlin went to London. He visited the Archbishop, the
most important man in the Church.
‘Call the knights to London. Then we will find the new king,’ Merlin told the Archbishop.
The knights came to London. They met at a large church, and the Archbishop spoke to
them. When they came outside, they saw something strange in front of the church. It was
a very large stone with a great sword in it. The sun shone on the sword and it looked very
strong. The knights were excited, and started to talk about it.
* Sir is name for a knight.‘ Where did it come from?’
‘How did it get here?’
‘Who brought the stone here? We didn’t see anybody. And who put the sword in it?’
On the stone were these words:
ONLY THE KING
CAN TAKE THE SWORD FROM THE STONE
Every knight tried to pull the sword out of the stone. Nobody could do it — the sword did
not come out. The knights pulled and pulled. But they could not move the sword.
‘Our king is not here,’ said the Archbishop. ‘But I know that we will find him.’
Ten knights stayed and watched the stone. The Archbishop invited all the great men in
the country to London for a big fight. There were many big fights at that time. People
fought on horses with swords in their hands. The strongest and best knight always won.
‘Perhaps the new king will come to the fight,’ thought the Archbishop.
Sir Ector went to the fight with his two sons, Sir Kay and young Arthur. Arthur was now
sixteen years old. The young men wanted to fight with the other knights, but Sir Kay did
not have a sword. Arthur was a kind young man. He wanted to help.
‘There is a sword in a stone outside a church. I saw it on the way here. I will get it and
fight with it. Then you can have my sword,’ he said to his brother.
Arthur left Sir Kay and quickly went to the church. There were no knights outside by the
stone because they were at the fight. Arthur climbed down from his horse and went to the
stone. He did not read the words on the stone. He took the sword in his hand and pulled. It
came out of the stone easily.
He ran back to his horse with the sword. Some minutes later he met Sir Kay and Sir
Ector again, and he showed them the sword.
‘Where did that sword come from?’ Sir Ector asked. He knew about the words on the
stone.
They went back to the place outside the church, and Sir Ector put the sword in the
stone again.
‘Now pull it out,’ he said to Arthur.
Arthur pulled it out. It came out as easily as a knife out of butter. Sir Ector saw this and
took Arthur’s hand. ‘You are my king,’ he said.
Arthur did not understand. What did his father mean? ‘Arthur,’ Sir Ector said slowly, ‘I
love you very much, but I am not really your father. Merlin, the famous man of magic,
brought you to me when you were a small child. I took you into my family because he
asked me. Now I know that you are the king.’He took the sword in his hand and pulled.‘I will try to be a good king,’ said Arthur. ‘And I will listen to your words, because you are
my father. Sir Kay, my brother, you will be an important knight and a friend to me.’
Then they went to the Archbishop and told him everything. The knights were angry.
They did not think that Arthur was really the king. So the Archbishop called all the knights
to the stone.
Arthur put the sword back into the stone. Every knight tried again to take it out, but it did
not move. Then they watched and Arthur pulled it out easily.
Everybody shouted, ‘Arthur is our king! Arthur is our king!’

Many people came to see Arthur. They were all happy because now they had a kind, good
king. He was strong and he was not afraid.
Merlin told Arthur the story of his parents. ‘Your father was King Uther and your mother
was Queen Igraine. When you were a baby, I took you to Avalon, a magic place. You were
born with magic in your life. You will be the best knight and you will be the greatest king.
You will live for a very long time.’

So King Arthur began a new life. He took his horse and went through the country with his
knights. Sometimes they had to fight bad men but they were not afraid. Arthur was a good
king, and his knights were brave. His country was a quiet place again.
Chapter  
The Round Table
King Arthur went to the north and the east with his knights and fought the Saxons. Then
they came back and stopped in the town of Camelot. Arthur made it the most important
town in the country. It was now his home, and the home of his brave knights.
One day King Arthur visited his friend, King Leodegraunce. He had a daughter and she
was the most beautiful woman in England. The daughter’s name was Guinevere. When he
went back to Camelot, Arthur could not stop thinking about her.
‘I love Guinevere and I want to marry her,’ Arthur told Merlin. King Leodegraunce was
very happy. Arthur was a good and brave man — a good husband for his lovely daughter.
So Arthur and Guinevere went to church and the Archbishop married them. Everybody
enjoyed a wonderful party in Camelot.
Then Merlin made a large round table for King Arthur’s knights in Camelot. There were
    places at the great wood and stone table. King Arthur gave his best and bravest
knights a place at the Round Table. Each knight had his place at the table, but no chair
was better than another chair. Nobody sat at the top of a round table and nobody sat atthe bottom.
‘The names of the Knights of the Round Table will be famous!’ cried Merlin.

Some knights died and other brave and good knights came to Camelot. One day a new
knight, Sir Pellinore, arrived at Camelot, and Arthur gave him a place at the Round Table.
For a long time there was one place with no knight. Merlin could see into the future.
‘Only a good knight, your best knight, will sit there,’ Merlin told King Arthur. ‘The place is
for your best knight, and he will come to it.’
After many years Sir Galahad came and sat in that place at the Round Table.
Chapter  
The Sword, Excalibur
King Arthur went round the country on his horse. He met his people and helped them. One
day he came to a great wood. When evening came, King Arthur was not out of the wood.
Then he saw a very big, beautiful castle in front of him.
He went nearer, and the great door of the castle opened. A woman came out.
‘King Arthur,’ she said. ‘I am Queen Annoure. Stay in my castle. It is getting dark. I will
give you food and a bed for the night.’
Arthur was hungry and thirsty. He was also tired. He looked at the dark sky. ‘Thank
you,’ he said, and he went in.
The Queen was kind to Arthur. She took his horse and gave it food and water. She took
Arthur to the dining-room of her castle and gave him bread, meat and wine. Then one of
Queen Annoure’s men took the King to his bedroom, and Arthur went to sleep.

The next morning, after breakfast, Queen Annoure wanted to see Arthur.
‘I would like to show you my castle and the beautiful things in it,’ she said. ‘I am the
richest person in the world. Look — everything here is mine.’
Arthur looked at her castle. They went from room to room, and each room was richer
than the room before that. There were beautiful things everywhere. Queen Annoure knew
a lot of magic, so she could make beautiful things.
Then they came out on to the top of the castle.
‘Look at those beautiful trees and gardens,’ said the Queen. ‘And look at those woods.
They are mine too. This is my country. And can you see that great wall round the castle?
Stay with me and be king here! You cannot leave. The door of the castle is shut, and that
great wall will stop you. My men are ready. Do not leave, or they will kill you.’
‘Your magic cannot hurt me, and your men cannot kill me,’ answered King Arthur.Then, with his sword in his hand and his helmet on his head, Arthur went out of the
castle, and through the door in the great wall. Nobody could stop him.

Queen Annoure sent one of her men to Sir Pellinore. He lived near her castle, and he had
a place at King Arthur’s Round Table.
‘Queen Annoure says that a very bad knight is on his way to her castle. He wants to kill
her and take her money. He is very near here, and he will go past your house. Please go
out and fight him for my queen,’ the man said to Sir Pellinore.
So Pellinore sat on his horse and waited. He did not know that King Arthur was the
‘very bad knight’. Arthur met Pellinore on the road.
‘Sir! Knight!’ cried Arthur. ‘Why are you waiting here? Do you want to fight me?’
‘Yes!’ shouted Sir Pellinore, and he took his sword in his hand.
Pellinore hit the King with his sword and Arthur fell from his horse. He stood up. He was
very angry and pulled out his sword. They had a long fight, and then the King’s sword
broke.
‘Ha!’ cried Sir Pellinore. ‘That is the end of the fight! I can kill you now!’
Arthur threw down his sword. He ran at Sir Pellinore and threw him on to the ground.
The two men were very tired, but they fought for a little longer. Then Arthur put his foot on
Pellinore’s head. Arthur took the helmet from his head, so Pellinore could see his face.
‘Shall I kill you? ‘ Arthur said.
Pellinore looked up and saw Arthur’s face.
‘My King!’ he cried. ‘I did not know it was you! Queen Annoure wanted me to fight a bad
knight on this road.’
‘I am not that bad knight! But I know you did not want to kill your king,’ said King Arthur.
Then the two men were friends again.

Sir Pellinore hurt King Arthur in the fight, so Merlin visited Arthur. In three days Arthur was
well again.
‘My sword broke in the fight,’ Arthur told Merlin.
‘That sword was not important,’ said Merlin. ‘ Come with me and you will find the best
sword in the world. It is a magic sword from Avalon, the place of magic.’
The King went with Merlin through a dark wood. The trees shut out the light from the
sun and Arthur could not see the sky. After a long time they came to an open place in the
The revolver cracked and shot a hole in a picture. The second
policeman brought his poker down on the little weapon and sent
it to the floor.
The axe went back into the passage. They could hear the
Invisible Man breathing.
   Stand away, you two,  he said.  I want that man Kemp. 
 We want you,  said the first policeman, taking a quick step
forward and striking with his poker at the Voice. The Invisible
Man must have stepped back and fallen over a chair.
Then, as the policeman went after him, the Invisible Man
returned and struck him down.
But the second policeman, aiming behind the axe with his
poker, hit something soft that cracked. There was a sharp cry of
pain, and then the axe fell to the ground. The policeman struck
again at emptiness and hit nothing; he put his foot on the axe and
struck again. Then he stood, holding the poker, listening for the
slightest movement.
He heard a window open, and a quick rush of feet outside. His
companion rolled over and sat up, with blood running down
between his eye and ear.
 Where is he?  asked the man on the floor.
 I don t know. I ve hit him. He s standing somewhere in the
hall unless he s slipped past you. Dr Kemp - sir! 
 Dr Kemp,  cried the policeman again.
The second policeman began struggling to his feet. He stood
up. Suddenly the faint sound of bare feet could be heard.  Whup! 
cried the first policeman, and threw his poker.
He started to go after the Invisible Man. Then he changed his
mind and stepped into the dining room.
 Dr Kemp-  he began.
The dining-room window was wide open, and neither servant
nor Kemp was to be seen.
Kemp had set off running, running to save his life as he had seen
Mr Marvel run down the hill road. Never, he thought, had he seemed to run so slowly.
People looked at him. They saw fear in his face.
Now he was rushing to the town below, where people were
standing or walking in groups.
He slowed down and then heard rapid footsteps behind.
 The Invisible Man,  he cried. He thought of going into the
police station, but changed his mind, turned down a side street
and then into a yard, into a little house and so back into the main
road.
A crowd had collected in the street; there was a noise of
running feet. A big man, a few yards away, was swinging a heavy
spade, striking at something. Another man came out of a shop
with a thick stick in his hand.  Spread out! Spread out!  cried
someone. Kemp stopped and looked round, breathing heavily.
 He s close!  he cried.  Form a line across— 
He was hit hard under the ear and tried to turn round towards
his unseen enemy. Then he was hit again under the jaw, and fell
to the ground. In another moment a knee was digging into his
chest and hands held his throat, but one hand was weaker than
the other; then the spade of the big man came through the air
above him, and struck something. He felt warm blood on his
face. The hold on his throat was loosened and Kemp rolled on
top of his enemy.
 I ve got him!  cried Kemp.  Help! Help - hold him! He s
down! Hold his feet! 
In another second there was a rush of people to the struggle.
There was no shouting after Kemp s cry - only a sound of blows
and feet and heavy breathing.
Then the Invisible Man got to his feet. Kemp still held his
legs. Then someone got hold of his neck and pulled him back.
Down went the pile of struggling, kicking men again. Then
suddenly came a wild cry that died away into silence.
 Get back!  cried Kemp.  He s hurt, I tell you. Stand back. 
     
Chapter   
The Hunter HuntedA doctor was feeling the unseen body.
 The mouth is all wet,  he said.
He stood up quickly, and then knelt down on the ground by
the side of the unseen thing. More people joined the pushing
crowd. Men were coming out of the houses. The doors of the inn
stood wide open. Very little was said. Kemp felt around him; his
hands seemed to pass through empty air.  He s not breathing,  he
said, and then, I cannot feel his heart. His side — ugh! 
An old woman, looking under the arm of the big man with
the spade, cried out.  Look there!  she said, and pointed. And
looking where she pointed, everyone saw a shadowy, cloudy
body. At first, they could see through it, but it was becoming
more solid every moment.
 Hello!  cried the policeman.  Here are his feet showing! 
And so, slowly, beginning at his hands and feet, and spreading
slowly to the centre of his body, that strange change continued. It
was like the slow movement of a poison. They saw the glassy
bones, then the flesh and skin, misty at first but slowly growing
thicker and harder and more solid. Soon they could see his chest
and his shoulders, and the faint shape of his face.
When at last the crowd made way for Kemp to stand back,
there lay the bare and broken body of a young man of about
thirty. His hair was white — not grey with age, but white as snow
— and his eyes were bright like jewels. His expression was one of
anger and fear.
 Cover his face!  cried a man.  In God s name, cover that face! 
Someone brought a sheet. They covered him, and carried him
into the inn. And there it was, on a bed in an ill-lighted bedroom,
among a crowd of excited people, that Griffin, the first of all men
to make himself invisible, ended his strange and terrible life.
ACTIVITIES
Chapters  - 
Before you read
  What is an  invisible man ? Why do you think someone might want
to become invisible?
  Find the words in italics in your dictionary. They are all
in the story. Answer the questions.
a Do you use a napkin in a dining-room or in a bedroom?
b Does a businessman or a farmer use a scythe?
c Is a shilling a coin or a tool?
d Would you probably see a vicar at a football game or a funeral?
e Does an inn have bedrooms for guests or shops for customers?
f
g
n
i
Is a carriage pulled by a car or by horses?
Would you see a coach on a river or on a road?
Do you sit and chat or wash the dishes in a parlour?
What kind of animal growls - a cat or a dog?
After you read
  Are these statements about the Invisible Man true or false? Correct
the false ones.
a He feels the cold.
b He eats and smokes.
c He enjoys the company of others.
d He has money.
e He gives Mrs Hall his name and address.
f He is a scientist.
g There is nothing under his clothes.
  Who are:
a Mr and Mrs Hall?
b Millie?
c Teddy Henfrey?
d Fearenside?
e Cuss?
f Bunting?
    Work in pairs. Imagine a conversation between Mrs Hall and Cuss.
Student A: You are Mrs Hall. Describe the Invisible Man s
appearance on his arrival at the inn, and say how
you felt about him.
Student B: You are Cuss. Explain why you decided to talk to the
stranger, what happened and how you felt. Then, still
playing these parts, discuss possible explanations
for this strange figure.
Chapters  - 
Before you read
  Look at the titles of the next few chapters. What do you think the
answers are to the questions?
The Robbery at the Vicarage
a Who is the thief?
b What does he steal?
The Furniture That Went Mad
c How does furniture  go mad ?
The Stranger Shows His Face
d Who does he show it to?
e What does it look like?
On the Road
f Why does the stranger leave the inn?
  Find these words in your dictionary.
arrest bare poker sneeze tramp visible
Match them with the right groups. Think of a word or phrase
to describe each group.
a arrest
  ill, cold, sore throat
b bare
  beg, poor, unemployed
c poker
  seen, obvious, clear
d sneeze
  police, jail, criminal
e tramp
  fire, coal, wood
f visible
  undressed, embarrassing, freezing
  Write a sentence for each of the new words. Use the new word and
at least one of the other words from Exercise   in each sentence.
  
After you read
  As you read, find the answers to the questions in Activity  .
   Why:
a do the Buntings wait until the servant is in the kitchen
before they go upstairs?
b do the Halls hear coughs and sneezes on their stairs?
c does Mrs Hall stop answering the stranger s bell?
d does the stranger s nose roll across the floor?
e does he take his shirt off?
f does Jaffers lie on the ground without moving?
g does the Invisible Man throw stones at the tramp?
h does the tramp try to enter the parlour at the inn?
   Explain how:
a Mr and Mrs Bunting are robbed.
b the Halls know that the stranger left the inn during the night.
c the stranger removes Mrs Hall from his bedroom.
d the stranger escapes from the policeman and the villagers.
Chapters  -  
Before you read
   How do you think Mr Marvel managed to take the clothes and
books from the inn?
After you read
   Who is talking to whom? Who or what are they talking about?
a  . .. it s all Greek or Russian or some other language. 
b  He s got my trousers - and all the vicar s clothes! 
c  I ve got a weak heart. 
d  There isn t any Invisible Man at all. 
e  He seems to be in a hurry. 
   What is  the story of the flying money ?
   Discuss the development of the Invisible Man s character and
attitudes. What was he like when he arrived at the inn? What is he
like now? How do you think he will change as the story continues?
     Work in pairs and act out the conversation between Dr Kemp and
Chapters   -  
Before you read
   Give your opinion.
a Will Mr Marvel escape from the Invisible Man?
b How will Dr Kemp become important to the story?
c Is there any way of catching someone who is invisible?
   Check the meaning of these words in your dictionary.
cricketer revolver colonel experiment cabman
Three of them are people, one is made of metal and one is a
type of test. Which is which?
   Which thing or person from Exercise    would you see in
these places?
a a soldier s hand
b an army office
c a sports field
d a carriage
e a laboratory
After you read
   Use one word to complete these sentences.
a Mr Marvel is
of the Invisible Man.
b The man with the black beard s solution is to
the
Invisible Man.
c Dr Kemp shares a house with his
d A spot of
is the first evidence of the Invisible Man s
presence in Kemp s house.
e Dr Kemp finds it
to believe that a man can be
invisible.
f He believes that Griffin should be
g As a science student, Griffin was interested in
h His father
himself because he owed the money that
Griffin had stolen from him.
i Before Griffin left his room in London, he set
to the
house.
  
Griffin, using your own words.
Student A: You are Dr Kemp. Ask questions to find out how
and why Griffin became invisible.
Student B: Answer Dr Kemp s questions by telling the story of
your scientific experiments.
Chapters   -  
Before you read
   What has driven Griffin to behave as he does? How far do you
think he is prepared to go to achieve his aims?
   What are these words in your language? Find them in your
dictionary.
axe bloodhound
Mark each sentence A for axe or B for bloodhound.
a It has a tail.
b It has a handle.
c It likes to go hunting.
d It is used for cutting wood.
e It has a heavy metal blade.
f It has sharp teeth.
After you read
   Answer these questions about the story.
  What did Griffin plan to do in Port Burdock?
  What does he tell Kemp is his plan now?
  What does Kemp plan to do when Adye and his men arrive?
  Why does his plan fail?
  What happens to Mr Wicksteed?
  Who is the next person to be wounded or killed?
  Who catches Griffin?
  What happens to Griffin as he dies?
   Discuss the measures that Kemp explains to Colonel Adye are
necessary to catch Griffin. How helpful is his advice?
  Writing
   What kind of man is Griffin? Describe his character.
   Imagine you are Kemp. Write a letter to a college friend who also
knew Griffin. Tell him/her about your recent experiences.
   Choose a character other than Griffin and Kemp and explain the
part he/she plays in the story.
   Imagine that you could make yourself invisible. How would you use
this ability?
   The writer appears to be making a connection between scientific
discovery and power. What possible connections can there be?
Give other true examples of the way scientific discoveries have
been used to harm or control others.
   Write a book report for someone who is considering reading The
Invisible Man. Without spoiling the story by telling too much of it,
explain why you did or did not enjoy it.
Answers for the Activities in this book are available from your local office or alternatively write to:
Penguin Readers Marketing Department, Pearson Education, Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, Essex
